ON TUESDAY,
SEPTEMBER 27 MEETING OF THE
INDEPENDENT COMMUNITY POLICE
OVERSIGHT COMMISSION TO ORDER
MOVES TO ASK COULD YOU DO THE
ROLL FOR US FOR THIS MEETING
WERE BROADCAST LIVE ON CITY AND
CABLE CHANNEL 16 AT&amp;T CHANNEL
NINE NINE ONLINE EIGHT TO
GUMMED UP OR WTT IN PUBLIC
COMMENTARY.
HERE WITH ME IN PERSON OR MY
COLLEAGUE EIGHT SEVEN SEVEN
EIGHT FIVE THREE BY
TWO FOUR
SEVEN OR EIGHT EIGHT EIGHT
SEVEN EIGHT ZERO ZERO NINE NINE
INTER MEETING IVI NINE THREE BY
ONE FIVE TWO ZERO NINE EIGHT
ONE COMMISSIONER MILGROM ABSENT
TODAY COMMISSIONER BILL
COMMISSIONERSHIP HERE COUNCIL
MEMBER ALLOWING YOUR COUNCIL
MEMBERS HERE TO PRESENT
COMMISSIONER HERE, COMMISSIONER
HARRISON HERE, COMMISSIONER
REISLER ABYSSINIANS
COMMISSIONER PRESENT VICE CHAIR
TO FOR OUR GREAT HERE WE HAVE A
QUORUM.
THANK YOU.
IS THERE A MOTION TO APPROVE
THE AGENDA?
&gt;&gt; DON&apos;T MOVE.
IS THERE A SECOND SECOND ALL IN
FAVOR OF APPROVING THE AGENDA
OR ANY POST?
THANK YOU.
AND THEN YOU ALL HAVE THE
MINUTES FROM THE AUGUST TWENTY
SECOND MEETING THAT WE HAD AT
COBBLESTONED FARM.
ARE THERE ANY CORRECTIONS,
ADDITIONS OR DISCUSSION
OF THOSE MINUTES
?
IF NOT, IS THERE A MOTION TO
APPROVE THE AUGUST TWENTY
TWENTY TWO MEETING MINUTES
MOTION TO APPROVE THE MINUTES
OF AUGUST?
&gt;&gt; TWENTY TWO IS OUR SECOND
ZACKHAM ALL IN FAVOR
OF APPROVING THE AUGUST TWENTY
TWENTY TWO MEETING MINUTES ALL
IN FAVOR I OPPOSED.
THANK YOU.
SO NOW WE&apos;VE COME TO A TIME FOR
A PUBLIC FORUM.
WE INVITE THE PUBLIC TO SPEAK
TO US ON ANY MATTERS OF CONCERN
THEY HAVE BEFORE THE
COMMISSION.
IF THERE&apos;S ANYONE IN PERSON WHO
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK, PLEASE
APPROACH THE PODIUM.
STATE YOUR NAME IF YOU LIKE.
MY NAME IS CHRIS STORY
.
WELL, I WANTED TO KIND TALK
ABOUT TONIGHT IS VERY PERSONAL
TO ME AND WHILE I DON&apos;T KNOW I
JUST WANTED TO REVISIT SOME
REMARKS THE MEMBER MALAWI MADE
A COUPLE MEETINGS AGO AT CITY
HALL CITY COUNCIL IN TALKING
ABOUT WEST PARK IN PARTICULAR
AND I QUOTE HIS WORDS DIRECTLY
HE SAID IT INVITES ACTIVITY
THAT IS UNDESIRABLE AND RIGHT
NOW THIS SITUATION IS GETTING A
LITTLE SEEDY AND HE TALKED
ABOUT HAVING ASSOCIATION WITH
THE POLICE CHIEF AND JUST A PD
IN GENERAL AND THIS IS A
PERFECT REASON WHY I AM
THANKFUL THAT WE WOULD NOT NO
LONGER SERVE THE CITY AT THE
REQUEST OF THE VOTERS.
IT&apos;S THIS VERY COMMISSION AND I
THINK A NEW NEWS ARTICLE I
BELIEVE THAT SAID THERE WAS ONE
STICKING OUT IN MY MIND A
TWELVE YEAR OLD BLACK BOY AND
MIGHT BE GETTING SOME OF THESE
DETAILS WRONG BUT WAS
INTERROGATED BY POLICE KIND
OF COERCED INTO A SQUAD CAR AS
A QUOTE UNQUOTE FRIENDLY RIDE
HOME.
YOU KNOW AND I KNOW MR.
O&apos;MALLEY HEARS THESE THINGS.
I DON&apos;T KNOW WHY YOU&apos;RE ASKING
FOR INCREASED POLICING WEST
PARK WHILE SERVING ON THE
POLICE OVERSIGHT COMMISSION.
IT&apos;S JUST MIND BOGGLING TO ME.
BUT I WOULD LIKE TO ASK FOR
LESS POLICING OF WEST PARK.
IT&apos;S A PERFECT EXAMPLE OF WHAT
WE SUPPORT.
WE WANT ANN ARBOR TO BE A PLACE
THAT&apos;S WELCOMING FOR EVERYONE.
THERE&apos;S A WIDE VARIETY
OF PEOPLE THAT USE THE PARK.
I JUST TOOK A WALK OVER THERE
TODAY AND SAW AN ELDERLY WOMAN.
THERE WAS A WOMAN WITH
GROCERIES WALKING THROUGH
PROBABLY GOING HOME THERE WAS A
WOMAN WITH A DOG IN THE CENTER
TRACK JUST THROWING THE BALL.
THERE IS A GUY DOING EXERCISES
ON THE BASKETBALL COURT AND
I&apos;VE SEEN POLITICAL EVENTS,
BIRTHDAY PARTIES, GRADUATE
STUDENT PARTIES AND YES
DELANO&apos;S CENTER IS LOCATED
NEARBY AND IT&apos;S IT&apos;S A PLACE
WHERE PEOPLE WHO ARE HOMELESS
AND HOUSING INSECURE CAN SPEND
A LITTLE TIME IN A PARK OR IN
NATURE PLAYING BASKETBALL OR
TENNIS OR WHATEVER.
AND SO THE PLACE IS OVERPOLICED
ALREADY WE KNOW THIS AND JUST
FROM THE HOMELESS COMMUNITY AND
WHEN I WAS HOMELESS THERE&apos;S A
LOT OF STORIES SO PLEASE DO NOT
INCREASE POLICING AND I&apos;M
PROBABLY GOING OVER TIME.
I&apos;M SORRY ABOUT THAT BUT THANK
YOU.
THANK THANK YOU.
&gt;&gt; IS THERE ANYONE ON THE PHONE
?
&gt;&gt; I DO NOT HAVE ANY PRESENTLY.
OK SO AT THIS POINT IT LOOKS AS
IF WE DO NOT HAVE OLD BUSINESS
BUT WE HAVE LOTS OF NEW
BUSINESS CHIEF AMONG THOSE IS
ELECTING A NEW SLATE
OF OFFICERS FOR THIS COMMISSION
ALTHOUGH I HAVE HAVE THOROUGHLY
ENJOYED REALLY REALLY ENJOYED
SERVING AS THE CHAIR OF THIS
COMMISSION THROUGH ALL OF ITS
UPS AND DOWNS.
IT IS CERTAINLY TIME FOR SOME
NEW LEADERSHIP.
&gt;&gt; IS THERE ANYONE WHO MIGHT BE
WILLING TO SERVE AS THE NEW
CHAIR?
&gt;&gt; OH, WE HAVE ONE VOLUNTEER.
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
SO MR. DOYLE HARGREAVES HAS HAS
VOLUNTEERED TO DO SO.
&gt;&gt; DO WE HAVE ANYONE WHO MIGHT
BE WILLING TO SERVE AS VICE
CHAIR?
I HAVE BEEN VOLUNTEERED TIME IS
VORLON TOLD YOU YOU WERE
VONTOBEL DO THAT YOU WERE
VOLUNTEERING.
BUT WE YOU WE SAW YOU RAISE
YOUR HAND OF YOUR OWN ACCORD.
IT IS TRUE AND WE GREATLY
APPRECIATE THAT.
AND SO NOW WE SHOULD HAVE AN
ELECTION TO DETERMINE WHETHER
THESE FOLKS SHOULD BE ELECTED.
IS THERE ANYONE ELSE WHO WOULD
CARE TO SERVE IN ANY OF THESE
ROLES?
I SEE WE&apos;RE GOING TO HAVE A
REALLY PEACEFUL TRANSFER
OF POWER.
WE SINCE EVERYONE IS RUNNING
UNOPPOSED.
WOULD YOU ALL LIKE TO DO THIS
PUBLICLY OR SHOULD WE USE
PAPER?
WE CAN USE PAPER AND INK.
EVERYBODY CAN WRITE THEIR
SELECTION OR CHAIR AND VICE
CHAIR ON PAPER IF YOU LIKE TO
READ TO USE PAPER WE&apos;VE DONE IT
THAT WAY AND WE&apos;VE DONE IT
VOICE VOTE.
I THINK I THINK SINCE THERE IS
NO OTHER CANDIDATE TO THESE
POSITIONS AND THERE&apos;S NO ONE
WHO WAS OF COURSE WHAT WE CAN
DO IS YOU CAN HAVE A MOTION AND
APPROVE BOTH THE PRESIDENT AND
VICE PRESIDENT IF THERE&apos;S NEY&apos;S
FUTURE I THINK PROBABLY I&apos;D BE
JUST AS TRANSPARENT AS POSSIBLE
JUST TO HAVE IT IN PUBLIC BUT
CERTAINLY PAPER THAT WOULD
CERTAINLY IMPROVE TRANSPARENCY
ALTHOUGH IT&apos;S HAD WE HAD TWO
PEOPLE RUNNING I BELIEVE WE DID
IT ON PAPER LAST TIME.
SO IS THERE A MOTION TO
NOMINATE FRANCIS TO DRAW
HARGREAVES AS THE NEW CHAIR
OF THE PARK AS WELL AS STEFANIC
PART OF THE NEW VICE CHAIR?
I MAKE A MOTION IS THERE A
SECOND BY SECOND THANK YOU ALL
IN FAVOR OF THESE OFFICERS.
&gt;&gt; I IS THERE ANY WHO WANT TO
POST ALL RIGHT.
WE HAVE A NEW CHAIR AND A NEW
VICE CHAIR AND I AM VERY
EXCITED ABOUT THIS.
WE HAVE BEEN PLANNING FOR SUCH
A TRANSITION FOR SOME TIME AND
NOW IT IS FINALLY HERE.
SO MISSED HERE YOU SHOULD TAKE
OVER FROM HERE.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;M SORRY.
I THINK WE CAN DO IS JUST FOR
THE CONTINUITY IS THE CURRENT
CHAIR JUST KEEPS RUNNING THIS
SURVEY OUT TODAY.
&gt;&gt; YES.
OK, I APOLOGIZE IF I SEEM TOO
EAGER TO ABDICATE MY POSITION I
APOLOGIZE.
I&apos;M HAPPY TO SERVE OUT THESE
NEXT HOUR AND FORTY FIVE
MINUTES THAT&apos;S FORTY FIVE AN
HOUR AND FORTY FIVE OR LESS
PERHAPS.
ALL RIGHT THANK YOU.
THANK YOU EVERYONE.
AND WE LOOK FORWARD TO TAKING
OVER AND DOING THINGS IN YOUR
WAY WHAT THE THINGS SO THE NEXT
THING ON THE AGENDA IS TO
DISCUSS THE SURVEY BY PUBLIC
SECTOR CONSULTING AND SO FOR A
TINY BIT OF BACKGROUND THE
RESOLUTION THAT WAS PASSED BY
COUNCIL IN APRIL OF TWENTY
TWENTY ONE INDICATED THAT THERE
SHOULD BE AN EXPLORATION OF AN
UNARMED RESPONSE PROGRAM IN THE
CITY OF ANN ARBOR AND THAT THAT
EXPLORATION SHOULD BE CONDUCTED
IN CONCERT WITH AND IN
COOPERATION WITH AND IN
CONSULTATION WITH IS THE QUOTE
THE INDEPENDENT COMMUNITY
POLICE OVERSIGHT COMMISSION
THAT WORKED TO VARYING DEGREES
AND A REPORT WAS PRODUCED AND
AFTER THE REPORT WAS PRODUCED
THAT DECIDED TO CONTINUE TO
EXPLORE IN OUR RESPONSE THAT
HAPPENED THAT REPORT WAS
PRODUCED IN DECEMBER OF TWENTY
TWENTY ONE COUNCIL DEVOTED
DECIDED TO DEVOTE SOME OF THE
FEDERAL R.P.M. TO AN UNARMED
RESPONSE PROGRAM.
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT THIS
COMMISSION INSISTED UPON WAS
THAT THE PEOPLE WHO LIVE, WORK
AND VISIT IN ANN ARBOR BE
CONSULTED ABOUT WHAT KIND
OF RESPONSE PROGRAM WOULD BE
MOST APPROPRIATE AND THAT SOME
ACTUAL CONVERSATIONS TAKE PLACE
.
&gt;&gt; WE DEMANDED SEVERAL THINGS
OF AND ASKED THAT VERY
SPECIFICALLY OF DEPUTY OR
ASSISTANT.
I&apos;M SORRY WHICH WAY IT GOES.
CITY ADMINISTRATOR JOHN FORNIA
THAT FOR EXAMPLE PEOPLE WHO ARE
ON HOUSE BE CONSULTED THAT
COLLEGE STUDENTS BE CONSULTED,
THAT ANYONE WHO WAS MOST
PROXIMATE TO POTENTIAL MEETING
AND ON OUR RESPONSE BE
CONSULTED AND WHAT WE WANTED
WAS SOME REAL CONSULTATION.
LOTS OF PEOPLE IN ANN ARBOR
FEEL AS IF THEY HAVE BEEN
CONSULTED AND THEN THEIR IDEAS
ARE SORT OF DISCARDED AND THAT
IS JUST A PERFORMATIVE KIND
OF PROCESS.
AND SO WE ASKED FOR AN IN-DEPTH
PROCESS WHERE PEOPLE WOULD GO
INTO THE COMMUNITY AND MEET
WITH COMMUNITY MEMBERS AND TALK
TO THEM ABOUT OUR RESPONSE AND
BRING THAT INFORMATION BACK AT
SOME POINT THE CITY KNOWLEDGE
THAT THEY COULD NOT DO THAT SO
THEY PUT OUT AN RFP, A REQUEST
FOR PROPOSALS FROM GROUPS THAT
MIGHT BE ABLE TO PERFORM SUCH A
SERVICE.
THERE WERE SEVERAL FINALISTS.
THIS IS INFORMATION THAT IS
PUBLICLY AVAILABLE ON REGISTAR
.
ONE OF THE GROUPS WAS A LOCAL
GROUP THAT CONSISTED OF SEVERAL
COMMUNITY MEMBERS WITH RESEARCH
EXPERTIZE, WITH SURVEY
EXPERTIZE AND SOME WITH DEEP
TIES TO IMPACTED COMMUNITIES
AND THEIR PROPOSAL WAS QUITE
SUBSTANTIVE AND IS MY
UNDERSTANDING IT SCORED HIGH
THE HIGHEST BUT THEY WERE NOT
SELECTED PUBLIC SECTOR
CONSULTING FIRM OUT OF LANSING
WAS SELECTED.
THAT CONTRACT WAS FOR NINE
NINETY NINE THOUSAND NINE
HUNDRED AND EIGHTEEN DOLLARS I
BELIEVE WAS VERY CLOSE TO ONE
HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS.
&gt;&gt; AND SO PUBLIC SECTOR
CONSULTING HAS BEEN CONDUCTING
SOME INTERVIEWS DURING THIS
TIME PERIOD AS PART OF WHAT WAS
AT ONE POINT A THREE STAGE
PROCESS FOR GATHERING
INFORMATION FROM PEOPLE WHO
LIVE AND WORK IN ANN ARBOR
ABOUT OUR RESPONSE I WAS I HAD
AN APPOINTMENT WITH THEIR GROUP
I THINK KATIE VAN DORN AND
RODERICK WHOSE LAST NAME I
DON&apos;T REMEMBER I APOLOGIZE ON
SEPTEMBER 7TH AND WE HAD AN
INTERESTING CONVERSATION BUT I
SPENT A LOT OF THE TIME SORT
OF INTERVIEWING THEM ABOUT
THEIR PROCESS AND I ASKED, FOR
EXAMPLE, HOW THEY PLAN TO
INTERVIEW PEOPLE WHO ARE ON AND
THEY INDICATED TO ME THAT THEY
HAD NO INTENTION OF DOING SO
DIRECTLY.
I ASKED THEM HOW THEY EXPECTED
TO GET THAT KIND OF INPUT AND
THEY DID NOT APPEAR TO HAVE A
PLAN AT THAT TIME.
THEY INDICATED TO ME THAT THEY
WOULD HAVE AN ONLINE SURVEY AT
WHICH POINT I INDICATED THAT
THAT WOULD NOT BE VERY
ACCESSIBLE FOR PEOPLE WHO ARE
ON HOUSE.
THEY ALSO INDICATED THEY BE
HAVING SOME IN-PERSON TOWN
HALLS AND I ASKED WHERE AND
WHEN THOSE WOULD BE AND WHY
THEY THOUGHT HOMELESS PEOPLE
ARE PEOPLE WHO ARE ON HOUSE
WOULD SHOW UP TO THOSE AND THEY
DID NOT REALLY HAVE AN ANSWER
TO THAT.
I ALSO ASKED HOW THEY WOULD
IMPACT ACCESS OTHER KINDS
OF GROUPS SUCH AS
AFRICAN-AMERICANS AND THEY YOU
KNOW, INDICATED THAT THEY DID
NOT NECESSARILY HAVE ACCESS TO
AFRICAN AMERICANS IN ANN ARBOR
AND HAVE SUBSEQUENTLY ASKED ME
FOR NAMES OF PEOPLE WHO MIGHT
GIVE THEM ACCESS TO SUCH GROUPS
.
WHAT IS TROUBLING ABOUT THIS IS
THAT YOUR NEW CHAIR DID SOME
MATH AND AND I BELIEVE PLEASE
CORRECT ME IF I AM INCORRECT
THAT IF THAT ONE HUNDRED
THOUSAND DOLLARS WERE ALLOCATED
AMONG PEOPLE WHO GOT PAID ONE
HUNDRED AND FIFTY FIVE DOLLARS
AN HOUR ONE FIFTY ONE FIFTY
THEY WOULD HAVE HOW MUCH TIME
TO DO THIS IN THREE MONTHS IT
WOULD BE ABOUT FIFTY FIVE HOURS
A WEEK FIFTY FIVE HOURS A WEEK
AND IT DOES NOT APPEAR THAT
PUBLIC SECTOR CONSULTING
SPENDING FIFTY FIVE HOURS A
WEEK I DON&apos;T KNOW HOW THEY
SPEND THEIR TIME HOWEVER THEY
DO NOT INTEND TO SPEND THAT
TIME IN THIS COMMUNITY.
&gt;&gt; THEY DO NOT HAVE TIES TO
THIS COMMUNITY NOR DO THEY
APPEAR TO HAVE TIES TO PEOPLE
WITH TIES TO THIS COMMUNITY.
&gt;&gt; AND SO IT IS VERY TROUBLING
THEN THAT WHAT THEY COME UP
WITH RIGHT NOW IS AN ONLINE
SURVEY WHICH ANY ONE OF US
COULD HAVE DONE FOR FREE IN
ABOUT THREE HOURS OF QUESTIONS
IN THE SURVEY ARE NOT VERY
IN-DEPTH.
THERE ARE A COUPLE OF OPEN
ENDED QUESTIONS RANKING
QUESTION AND SEVERAL YOU KNOW,
KIND OF I DO NOT WANT UNSURE
ACCEPTABLE PREFER AND SOME
STRONGLY AGREE AGREE DISAGREE
STRONGLY DISAGREE QUESTIONS.
&gt;&gt; SO THE SURVEY ITSELF IS KIND
OF DISAPPOINTING AND YET WHAT
THEY CONSISTENTLY ASK IS THAT
WE THEN DISTRIBUTE THIS SURVEY
AMONG OUR COMMUNITIES.
&gt;&gt; ONE OF THE COMMON THINGS
THAT HAPPENS IS THAT
PARTICIPANTS WHO SHARE THEIR
TIME AND EXPERTIZE THEIR
EXPERIENCES FOR EXAMPLE WITH
BEING ON HOW THEIR EXPERIENCES
WITH POLICE OFTEN GET PAID AT
LEAST IN GIFT CARDS AND THERE
DOES NOT SEEM TO BE A PLAN TO
DO THAT AND SO I AM VERY
WORRIED ABOUT HOW THIS ONE
HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS IS
BEING SPENT BECAUSE IT DOES NOT
TAKE VERY MUCH MONEY TO DEVELOP
AN ONLINE SURVEY LIKE THIS.
SO I WAS VERY TROUBLED BY MY
INTERACTIONS WITH THEM AND I
DID MY DUE DILIGENCE AND ASKED
QUITE A FEW QUESTIONS.
I JOKED THAT I INTERVIEWED THEM
MORE THAN THEY INTERVIEWED ME.
WE WERE TOLD VERY EARLY ON THAT
MULTIPLE MEMBERS FROM THIS
COMMISSION WOULD BE INTERVIEWED
AND SO I WOULD LIKE TO KNOW IF
THERE ARE ANY OTHER
COMMISSIONERS WHO WERE
INTERVIEWED.
SO THE THREE THE THREE OF US OK
AND I WAS INTERVIEWED IN MY
ROLE WITH THE NONPROFIT
KNOWLEDGE.
&gt;&gt; RIGHT.
SO YOU WERE INTERVIEWED IN YOUR
ROLE IN PEACE NEIGHBORHOOD
CENTER AND WHAT HAPPENED WITH
PROBABLY MORE THAN JUST ME WAS
WE WERE SAYING HAVE YOU TALKED
TO BONNIE BILLUPS EVEN HAVE YOU
EVEN TALKED TO X, Y Z PERSON?
AND APPARENTLY I GUESS THEY
FORGOT TO INTERVIEW FRANCIS AND
I KIND OF REACHED OUT AND SAID
WHEN IS THAT INTERVIEW TAKING
PLACE?
AT WHICH POINT THEY QUICKLY
SCHEDULED THE INTERVIEW AND SHE
SHOULD TAKE IT FROM HERE AS TO
WHAT HAPPENED IN THAT
INTERVIEW.
&gt;&gt; YEAH, SO I I DID TELL THEM
GOING THEY SENT ME A LIST
QUESTIONS AND I EXPLAINED THAT
AFTER THE QUESTIONS I HAD SOME
QUESTIONS FOR THEM AND I
STARTED OFF EXPLAINING THAT I
WAS PARTICIPATING IN THIS AS
THE VICE CHAIR OF THE POLICE
OVERSIGHT COMMISSION AND NOT IN
MY ROLE AS A NONPROFIT LEADER
AND THEY UNDERSTOOD THAT AND WE
PROCEEDED WITH CONVERSATION.
&gt;&gt; THERE WERE A LOT
OF QUESTIONS I DIDN&apos;T AGREE
WITH IN THE SENSE THAT I FELT
LIKE THEY WERE ASKING ME FOR
ANSWERS THAT I THOUGHT WE WERE
GOING TO OBTAIN FROM THEIR
RESEARCH THINGS LIKE WHAT DO
YOU THINK THE BEST TYPE
OF PROGRAM FOR THE COMMUNITY
IS?
AND I SAID WELL I CAN&apos;T ANSWER
THAT QUESTION UNTIL YOU COLLECT
THE INFORMATION FROM THE
COMMUNITY ABOUT WHAT THEY NEED
.
&gt;&gt; I AND THEY TOLD ME THEY SAID
WELL A LOT OF PEOPLE ARE
TELLING US EXACTLY WHAT THEY
WANT TO SEE AND I SAID WELL I
DON&apos;T KNOW WHAT THEY&apos;RE
INTERESTED IN IT IS I SAID BUT
THERE&apos;S A LOT OF THINGS GOING
ON IN THE COMMUNITY AND I CAN
TELL YOU FROM MY EXPERIENCE BUT
THAT&apos;S NOT THE WHOLE EXPERIENCE
.
THERE&apos;S OTHERS IN THIS
COMMUNITY AND YOU NEED TO BE
SPEAKING WITH THEM ALSO.
AND I USED AN EXAMPLE OF HOW
I&apos;M A MEMBER OF SAINT MARY&apos;S
STUDENT PARISH AND WE ARE PART
OF THE ROTATING SHELTER IN THE
WINTER TIME.
SO EVERY JANUARY THE OVERNIGHT
MEN&apos;S SHELTER IS AT THE CHURCH
AND I VOLUNTEER TO MAKE DINNERS
AND SO ON AND I WAS EXPLAINING
TO THEM INTERACTIONS THAT WE
HAVE AND IN TIMES POLICE NEED
TO BE CALLED BUT ARE THEY
REALLY WHO SHOULD BE CALLED AND
SO ON AND SO FORTH.
AND THEIR IMMEDIATE RESPONSE TO
ME WASN&apos;T ABOUT MY EXAMPLE OR
MY EXPERIENCES.
IT WAS ABOUT OH YOUR PARTY WE
NEED TO TALK TO THE HOMELESS
PEOPLE WHEN YOU&apos;RE HAVING THE
SHELTER AT ST. MARY&apos;S, CAN YOU
ARRANGE FOR US TO MEET WITH
PEOPLE AND SET ALL THAT UP FOR
US?
AND I SAID WELL NO BECAUSE IT
WILL BE OUTSIDE YOUR TIME FRAME
WHEN THAT HAPPENS.
&gt;&gt; BUT I JUST FOUND IT
INTERESTING THAT THEY WERE
REALLY LOOKING FOR
US AS A
COMMUNITY IN ADDITION TO THE
WORK THAT WE DO HERE ON THE
OVERSIGHT COMMISSION TO GIVE
ADDITIONAL HELP FOR THEM TO
FACILITATE WHAT WE ASKED FOR.
&gt;&gt; YOU KNOW, WE WERE WE WERE
THE ONES THAT ASKED FOR
SOMEBODY TO GO COLLECT THIS
INFORMATION FOR US.
SO I FOUND IT A BIT IRONIC THAT
THEY WERE THEN ASKING ME TO SET
UP THE MEETING FOR THEM.
THERE WERE ALSO SOME OTHER
QUESTIONS THAT I HAD CONCERNS
ABOUT.
I FELT LIKE THEY WERE MISSING
THE THE INTENT OF THIS PROGRAM
FOR ME FROM THE VERY BEGINNING
OF ALL OF THIS, THE ATTEMPT HAS
ALWAYS BEEN TO GET PEOPLE IN
NEED THE SERVICES THEY NEED AND
SERVICES BY THE RIGHT PEOPLE
ARE POLICE OFFICERS, ARE LAW
ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.
THEY ARE NOT SOCIAL WORKERS.
&gt;&gt; SO THE KEY TO THIS IS TO GET
SOCIAL WORKERS IN A POSITION TO
BE ABLE TO PROVIDE SERVICES
NEEDED BY THE COMMUNITY AND FOR
THE COMMUNITY.
I FELT LIKE THEY WERE ASKING ME
QUESTIONS THAT WERE MORE ABOUT
GETTING RID OF THE POLICE
OFFICERS AND ME THAT&apos;S NOT THE
POINT AND THAT&apos;S NOT THE PROPER
FOCUS AND I WAS VERY CONCERNED
ABOUT THAT.
I WAS I WAS ALSO MORE CONCERNED
WHEN THEY STARTED ASKING ME
WHAT VALUES I FELT SHOULD BE
PUT ON THE PROGRAM.
&gt;&gt; I SAID WELL WE&apos;LL START WITH
TREATING PEOPLE LIKE HUMAN
BEINGS WITH DIGNITY AND
INTEGRITY AND THEN YOU CAN JUST
GO FROM THERE.
I, I AND I EXPLAINED TO THEM I
I WAS FASCINATED BY THAT
QUESTION AND IT&apos;S KIND
OF HEARTBREAKING THAT IT HAD TO
BE ASKED BUT I THINK THAT I&apos;M
NOT SURE IF WE&apos;RE GOING TO GET
THE REPORT THAT WE WERE HOPING
TO GET.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;M NOT SURE IF IT&apos;S GOING
TO GIVE US THE INFORMATION WE
WERE LOOKING FOR BUT HOPEFULLY
WE&apos;RE ABLE TO ACCOMPLISH
SOMETHING THE ONE POSITIVE
THING THAT DID COME OUT OF THE
MEETING WAS APPARENTLY I WAS
THE FIRST PERSON TO EDUCATE
THEM ON THE FACT THAT ANN ARBOR
DID ACTUALLY USED TO HAVE A
CRISIS RESPONSE TEAM THAT WAS
OUT OF THE COUNTY AND THEY
WOULD WALK AROUND.
MY PERSONAL EXPERIENCE WITH
THEM WAS DOWNTOWN.
THEY WOULD BE DOWNTOWN WITH
THEIR CREDENTIALS AND THEIR
BACKPACKS.
WE WERE ABLE TO CALL THEM FOR
ASSISTANCE WHEN IT WAS NEEDED
APPARENTLY THAT THE TEAM THE
TEAM DIDN&apos;T THEY HAD NO
KNOWLEDGE OF THAT WHATSOEVER.
&gt;&gt; SO WE DID HAVE A GOOD
CONVERSATION ABOUT THAT AND WHY
DOESN&apos;T EXIST ANYMORE AND SO
ON.
SO HOPEFULLY THEY&apos;LL BE ABLE TO
CONNECT WITH PEOPLE IN REGARD
TO THAT AND FIND OUT WHAT THAT
USED TO BE AND WHY WE DON&apos;T
HAVE IT ANYMORE.
BUT YOU KNOW, AGAIN, I DON&apos;T
KNOW THAT THIS IS GOING TO BE
INITIALLY YOU KNOW WHAT WE
THOUGHT IT WOULD BE BUT
HOPEFULLY ARE ABLE TO GET SOME
SOLID INFORMATION OUT OF IT.
&gt;&gt; THIS SURVEY DID GO OUT TODAY
TO COMMUNITY NONPROFITS AND
COMMUNITY LEADERS AND COMMUNITY
GROUPS.
SO IT DEFINITELY REACHED A
WIDER RANGE OF PEOPLE AS
OF TODAY THAN IT HAD LAST WEEK.
SO THAT WAS GOOD TOO.
&gt;&gt; AND I DON&apos;T KNOW WHEN WE&apos;RE
I&apos;M GUESSING WE&apos;RE NOT GOING TO
GET THE RESULTS OF THAT UNTIL
WE GET THE FULL REPORT.
&gt;&gt; BUT UH, I QUIZZED THEM ON
THEIR TIMELINE.
YEAH, AND THEY SAID THAT THEY
EXPECTED THAT IT WOULD BE
ANALYZED IN JANUARY AND THAT
THERE WOULD BE A REPORT IN
FEBRUARY.
SHE WOULDN&apos;T GIVE ME THAT
INFORMATION ACTUALLY I ASKED
THAT SAME QUESTION AND SHE
DIDN&apos;T HAVE THAT INFORMATION.
YOU LOOKED A BIT NICER THAN ME
OR NOT.
I DON&apos;T KNOW.
I MIGHT HAVE BEEN MORE MORE
SCARY THAN YOU.
&gt;&gt; I DON&apos;T KNOW.
I THINK ONE OF THE THINGS
THAT&apos;S JUST DISTRESSING ABOUT
THE PROCESS IS THAT WHAT WE
ASKED OF THE CITY WAS FOR THEM
TO GO OUT AND TALK TO PEOPLE,
TO TALK TO COLLEGE STUDENTS AND
THERE&apos;S NO INDICATION TO ME
THAT ANYBODY IS QUERYING
COLLEGE STUDENTS.
SO IF COLLEGE STUDENTS USE
DRUGS OR ALCOHOL AND HAVE AN
OVERDOSE AND ARE RELUCTANT TO
CALL NINE ONE ONE BECAUSE THEY
DON&apos;T WANT TO GET IN LEGAL
TROUBLE AND THEY DON&apos;T UTILIZE
THESE SERVICES NOW THEY WOULD
BE A PRIME CANDIDATE FOR USING
IT ON OUR RESPONSE PROGRAM
BECAUSE THEY KNOW THERE IS NO
LAW ENFORCEMENT IN OUR LEGAL
CRIMINAL LEGAL PROCESS ATTACHED
TO THAT AND YET I DO NOT SEE
THAT COLLEGE STUDENTS ARE BEING
CONTAR ACTED INTERVIEWED OR
THEIR INPUT IS BEING TAKEN IN
ANY CONSIDERABLE MEASURE THERE
ARE DRUG HARM REDUCTION IN THIS
COMMUNITY WHO WORK WITH PEOPLE
WHO GO OUT IN THIS COMMUNITY
AND WORK WITH PEOPLE WHO ARE
SUBSTANCE USING PEOPLE WHO DO
NOT CALL WILL NOT CALL LAW
ENFORCEMENT BECAUSE OF THE
CRIMINAL LEGAL CONSEQUENCES AND
YET NEED ASSISTANCE AND THOSE
PEOPLE ARE NOT BEING CONTACTED
AT ALL COUNCIL MEMBERS ON I
APPRECIATE I APPRECIATE THIS
BEING SHARED AND I HEAR THE
CONCERNS.
SO I HAD REACHED OUT TO CITY TO
TO CITY STAFF AND ASK SOME
FOLLOW QUESTIONS ON THIS AND TO
MY UNDERSTANDING THAT IS THE
CONSULTANT IT&apos;S VERY EARLY IN
THE PROCESS AND THAT THERE&apos;S A
LIST AND PLAN TO ENGAGE FOLKS
INCLUDING WASHOE HOUSING
ALLIANCE AND OTHER EXECUTIVE
DIRECTORS I&apos;M SORRY I HAVE AN
EIGHT MONTH OLD PUPPY BEHIND
HERE.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;M GOING TO PICK THEM UP SO
AND THIS INCLUDES FOLKS WHO ARE
STRUGGLING WITH SUBSTANCE ABUSE
AND HOMELESSNESS.
HOW THAT&apos;S GOING TO HAPPEN I
NEED MORE DETAILS ON BUT I WILL
SHARE THAT EARLY ON IN IN OUR
TALKS WITH CITY STAFF, THE PLAN
WAS THAT OUR REQUEST WITH
COMMISSIONER JACKSON WAS THAT
WE&apos;D BE IN COMMUNITY AND
COMMUNITY SPACES AND THIS SO
IT&apos;S NOT ONLINE AND I WILL MAKE
SURE THAT THAT HAPPENS.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
THANK YOU FOR THERE ON YOUR WAY
BEHIND.
IT&apos;S SUPER IMPORTANT THAT WE
MEET PEOPLE WHERE THEY ARE
OTHERWISE WE JUST HAVE A BUNCH
OF ZOO MEETINGS AND ONLINE
SURVEYS AND DO WHAT WE ALWAYS
DO AND GET RESPONSES FROM
PEOPLE WHO ALWAYS RESPOND.
BUT THOSE ARE NOT THE PEOPLE
MOST PROXIMATE TO HARM.
THEY&apos;RE NOT THE PEOPLE MOST
LIKELY TO USE THE UNARMED
RESPONSE.
AND SO LUDICROUS TO SPEND ONE
HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS ON
THAT.
&gt;&gt; I THINK ONE OF THE THINGS
THEY DID EXPLAIN TO ME IS THAT
THEY TALKED ABOUT HAVING THESE
GROUP DISCUSSIONS WITH SPECIFIC
GROUPS THAT WOULD BE LIMITED TO
12 PEOPLE AND THAT WAS
SOMETHING THAT WAS NOT IN THEIR
ORIGINAL PROPOSAL BUT GOT ADDED
AS THEY WERE HAVING THESE
PRELIMINARY CONVERSATIONS WITH
PEOPLE.
&gt;&gt; SO I DO THINK THAT THEY
DIDN&apos;T HAVE A LOT OF FEEDBACK
FOR ME ON HOW THOSE ARE GOING
TO WORK JUST YET BECAUSE I JUST
LIKE COUNCIL MEMBERS SONG IS
SAYING IT&apos;S EARLY ON.
I THINK THAT&apos;S SOMETHING I
WOULD LIKE REGULAR UPDATES ON
BECAUSE WHEN YOU HAVE SOMETHING
THAT ONLY HAS SPACE FOR 12
PEOPLE TO REGISTER FOR, YOU
REALLY WANT TO MAKE SURE YOU
GET TWELVE PEOPLE THE RIGHT
TWELVE PEOPLE TO BE THERE AND
AND TO BE ABLE TO SPEAK AND AND
UNDERSTAND THAT THEY CAN SPEAK
OPENLY ALSO.
&gt;&gt; SO I THINK THAT THOSE ARE
THOSE ARE VERY IMPORTANT
DISCUSSION GROUPS THAT WE NEED
TO KEEP EYE ON AND MAKE SURE
HAPPEN.
YEAH, THEY&apos;RE BEING A LITTLE
SHORT ON DETAILS ABOUT HOW
THESE THINGS ARE GOING TO
HAPPEN AND I THINK THAT THOUGH
THE MEETINGS WITH THE TWELVE
PEOPLE ARE INTENDED TO BE
LEADERS FOR EXAMPLE OF THE
WASHINGTON HOUSING ALLIANCE OR
THIS PERSON OR THAT PERSON WHO
INTERACT WITH THOSE COMMUNITIES
BUT THEY&apos;RE NOT NECESSARILY
THEY&apos;RE REPRESENTATIVES
OF COMMUNITIES.
&gt;&gt; RIGHT.
THE ONE EXAMPLE THEY SPOKE TO
ME ABOUT WAS THE DOWNTOWN
BUSINESSES.
SO THE DOWNTOWN BUSINESSES
WOULD BE A GROUP AND I&apos;M
GUESSING WHEN SHE WAS ASKING
FOR ASSISTANCE WITH THE
HOMELESS MAYBE THEY&apos;LL DO ONE
AND THEY&apos;RE TRYING TO FIGHT.
I&apos;M NOT SURE WHY THEY&apos;RE NOT
WORKING WITH THE DYLANESQUE
CENTER BUT AND THEY NOW HAVE
SEEN ANDREW NAME ALSO BECAUSE I
GAVE THEM THEY WERE MISSING A
FEW DOWNTOWN CHURCHES.
BUT ST. ANDREW&apos;S HAS BREAKFAST
AND SO THAT&apos;S A GOOD PLACE IF
THEY WANTED TO DO OUTREACH
RIGHT.
WE WERE REALLY WORRIED THAT
THEY DIDN&apos;T KNOW ST. ANDREW&apos;S
EXISTED, THAT THEY&apos;RE DOING
BREAKFAST EVERY SINGLE MORNING
AND YET THEY DIDN&apos;T KNOW THAT
WAS THE CASE AND THEY DIDN&apos;T
THINK TO TALK TO ANYONE FROM
THERE.
AND SO I&apos;M ONE OF THE WORRIES
THAT I HAD BEFORE THIS PROCESS
STARTED WAS THIS PROCESS THAT
THEY&apos;RE USING WHICH IS CALLED.
SO YOU INTERVIEW A PERSON AND
YOU ASK THEM WHO ELSE YOU
SHOULD INTERVIEW AND THEN THEY
GAVE YOU SOME NAMES AND THEN
THEY GAVE YOU SOME NAMES.
HOWEVER, WHAT TENDS TO HAPPEN
AND WE KNOW THIS FROM THE
RESEARCH ANYBODY SURVEY
RESEARCH IS THAT WHEN YOU DO
YOU TEND TO GET VERY SIMILAR
KINDS OF PEOPLE.
YOU DON&apos;T GET A DIVERSE GROUP
OF PEOPLE.
PEOPLE TEND TO KNOW PEOPLE LIKE
THEM AND SO YOU GET THE
SNOWBALL EFFECT OF MANY PEOPLE
WHO ARE THE SAME.
AND WHAT WE EXPLICITLY ASKED
FOR IS THAT COMMUNITIES WHO
DON&apos;T USUALLY PARTICIPATE IN
THIS PROCESS BE INCLUDED THIS
TIME AND I I CANNOT STRESS THE
DEGREE TO WHICH WE WERE VERY
CLEAR ABOUT THAT.
AND SO WHEN THE CITY SAID THEY
COULD NOT ACCOMPLISH THAT AND
THAT THEY WOULD HIRE FIRM WHO
COULD IS VERY DISAPPOINTING TO
FIND OUT THAT A FIRM HAS BEEN
HIRED WITH NO TIES TO THIS
COMMUNITY WHO HAS NOT DEVELOPED
TIES TO THIS COMMUNITY, WHO IS
NOT EMPLOYING ANYONE FROM THIS
COMMUNITY.
AND SO IF YOU REALIZE THAT YOU
DON&apos;T HAVE THE REACH TO TO TO
TO TO DO OUTREACH WITH PEOPLE
WHO ARE IMPACTED IN THIS
COMMUNITY, THEN YOU NEED TO
CONTRACTS OR SUBCONTRACT WITH
SOMEBODY WHO CAN BECAUSE WE
SHOULD NOT BE EXPECTING PEOPLE
TO DO THIS WORK FOR FREE WHILE
YOU ARE SITTING ON ONE HUNDRED
THOUSAND DOLLARS AND AND
ON
THIS COMMISSION WE HAVE HAD TO
FIGHT FOR AS LITTLE AS FIVE
THOUSAND DOLLARS AND OUR BUDGET
IS NOT ONE HUNDRED THOUSAND
DOLLARS.
&gt;&gt; SO THAT SEEMS TO ME TO BE AN
ENORMITY OF MONEY TO DEVELOP
WHAT RIGHT NOW IS JUST AN
ONLINE SURVEY, A HOST, A FEW
TOWN HALLS AND A HOTEL
CONFERENCE ROOM SOMEWHERE AND
INVITE PEOPLE WHO ARE GOING TO
SHOW UP THERE INSTEAD OF GOING
OUT AND TALKING TO PEOPLE.
I HAVE SAT IN WHEELER PARK AND
WAITED FOR FOLKS TO WAKE UP WHO
WERE SLEEPING OR TO TALK TO
THEM.
I HAVE BEEN TO WEST PARK AND
TALK TO PEOPLE WHO ARE ON HOUSE
AND IF I CAN DO THAT THEN
SOMEBODY FROM LANSING CAN
DARWELL DRIVE DOWN HERE AND DO
THAT AND I&apos;M DOING THIS FOR
FREE AND I AM UNHAPPY.
I&apos;M SURE THAT&apos;S CLEAR.
SO HAS HAS THE DISPLEASURE
OF THIS COMMISSION BEEN
COMMUNICATED TO COUNCIL?
I MEAN IT&apos;S JUST STARTED CAN
ANYTHING AT THIS POINT BE DONE
TO HELP THEM WITH WHAT THEY
NEED TO DO?
YES, I DID COMMUNICATE MY
SIGNIOR CONCERNS IN A
CONVERSATION WITH COUNCIL
MEMBERS SOME TIME AGO AND THIS
HAS IN PART BEEN THE REASON WHY
SHE HAS BEEN REACHING OUT ABOUT
THIS.
BUT I THINK WHAT WE WANT ARE
MORE THAN JUST ASSURANCES THAT
THEY&apos;RE GOING TO DO BETTER.
I THINK WE WANT TO SEE A
SPECIFIC PLAN ABOUT WHO WHEN,
WHERE, WHAT IS BEING
INTERVIEWED, HOW THAT PROCESS
IS GOING TO WORK BECAUSE THE
RESOLUTION SAID THAT THIS
SHOULD HAPPEN IN CONCERT IN
CONSULTATION WITH THIS
COMMISSION AND I DO NOT KNOW
ANY MORE ABOUT THIS THAN WHAT I
GLEANED FROM MY INTERVIEW FROM
YOU OTHERS WHO HAVE BEEN
INTERVIEWED WHO HAVE REPORTED
BACK.
BUT I CAN TELL ALREADY THAT
THERE ARE SIGNIFICANT PEOPLE IN
THIS COMMUNITY WHO HAVE NOT
BEEN INTERVIEWED SINCE YOU GOT
SO YOU KNOW, I JUST I THINK WE
UNDERSTAND AND THE CONCERN AND
IF IT&apos;S THE COMMISSIONER DESIRE
TO TO DO SOMETHING ABOUT IT,
PERHAPS WE NEED SOME KIND OF A
MOTION TO SEND A COMMUNIQU
FROM THE COMMISSION TO COUNCIL
EXPRESSING OUR CONCERNS ABOUT
WHAT&apos;S GOING ON.
I DON&apos;T HOW ANYBODY ELSE FEELS
ABOUT IT BUT IF IT&apos;S NOT WHAT
THEY&apos;RE SUPPOSED TO DO AND
THEY&apos;RE NOT DOING IT, IT&apos;S TIME
NOW TO TELL SOMEBODY WHAT THEY
WOULD SUGGEST THAT THE NEXT
TIME THE NEW CHAIR WOULD
ADDRESS THE COUNCIL AND IT&apos;S
NEXT MEETING THIS TO BE THE
MAIN THING TO BE PRESENTED TO
THE COUNCIL THAT WOULD BE THE
EASIEST AND THE STRAIGHTFORWARD
THING ABOUT THE CONCERNS
OF THIS COMMISSION ABOUT THIS
PROCESS.
&gt;&gt; I THINK THAT THAT&apos;S GOOD.
BUT I THINK THERE A FORMAL
LETTER OR SOMETHING FROM THE
COMMISSION TO COUNCIL AND THEN
WHEN THE CHAIR MEETS WITH THEM
THAT WOULD BE IN FOLLOW UP TO A
FORMAL COMMUNICATION.
&gt;&gt; HOW ABOUT ABOVE AND YEAH, I
MEAN THE MONTHLY MONTHLY OF THE
CRIME RATE ON OCTOBER SIX
THIRTY SOMETHING IT&apos;S COMING UP
.
&gt;&gt; YEAH.
TO YOUR DIRECTOR CAN I ASK DO
WE KNOW IS THERE A POINT PERSON
WITHIN THE CITY WHO IS TO BE
WORKING SPECIFICALLY WITH THESE
CONSULTANTS?
IS IT THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR?
IS IT COOL THAT MAYBE THAT&apos;S
ONE OF THE STARTING POINTS ALSO
WITH VOICING THOSE CONCERNS TO
THAT POINT PERSON ALONG WITH
CITY COUNCIL?
&gt;&gt; I THINK IT&apos;S APPROPRIATE FOR
US TO COMMUNICATE THAT TO THE
CITY ADMINISTRATOR TONY, AT THE
BEGINNING OF THE PROCESS WE WE
HAVE OUR STANDING MEETING AND
WE EXPRESSED SOME CONCERNS
ABOUT THE PROCESS, NOT CONCERNS
THAT IN THE WAY WHICH IS BEING
CONDUCTED BEFORE IT BEGAN WE
SAID PLEASE DO NOT FORGET THAT
THESE THE THINGS THAT ARE
IMPORTANT TO US ENGAGING WITH
PEOPLE MOST IMPACTED.
THERE ARE THESE GROUPS THAT
HAVE TO ABSOLUTELY BE CONSULTED
BEFORE YOU GO ON THE GROUND AND
START TALKING TO PEOPLE AND WE
HAD A LIST THEY GAVE US A LIST.
IT WAS NOT A COMPLETE LIST BUT
A LIST OF PEOPLE WITH WHOM THEY
BE CONSULTING AND WE SAID BUT
YOU ALSO HAVE TO TALK TO ABCDE
AND E THIS MAKES SENSE.
AND SO CERTAINLY WE CAN
COMMUNICATE OUR CONCERNS NOW TO
CITY ADMINISTRATOR HONY.
I THINK I HAD SOME WORRIES
AFTER MY CONVERSATION WITH THEM
ABOUT THE WAYS IN WHICH THEY
COULD NOT ANSWER THE QUESTIONS
THAT I ASKED.
BUT THEN I BEGAN HEARING BACK
FROM OTHER PEOPLE IN THE
COMMUNITY ABOUT SIMILAR
CONCERNS AND THEN WE BEGAN TO
GET MORE REQUESTS FOR ACCESS TO
COMMUNITIES.
&gt;&gt; SO WHEN WHEN PEOPLE WANT TO
COMMUNICATE WITH VULNERABLE
COMMUNITIES THEY NEED TO DO SO
IN A CULTURALLY COMPETENT WAY.
&gt;&gt; YOU CAN&apos;T SEND SOME THREE
PIECE SUIT PERSON FROM LANTING
TO GO AND TALK TO A BUNCH
OF FOLKS HANGING OUT ASLEEP IN
THE PARK IF YOU&apos;RE NOT
COMFORTABLE DOING THAT AND IF
THEY ACKNOWLEDGE THAT&apos;S
SOMETHING THAT THEY CANNOT DO
THEN THEY NEED TO FIND SOMEONE
WHO CAN DO THAT AND I&apos;M HAPPY
TO AND SO I&apos;M SORRY TO.
SO TO ANSWER YOUR QUESTION, I&apos;M
JUST I&apos;M BECOMING MORE AND MORE
AWARE OF THE WAYS IN WHICH WHAT
WE THOUGHT WAS GOING TO HAPPEN
OR NOT HAPPENING AND SO THE
MORE I HEAR THE MORE CLEAR I AM
THAT THIS PROCESS HAS NOT
PANNED OUT TO BE WHAT WE
THOUGHT.
AND SO FAR WHAT&apos;S HAPPENED IS
NOTHING THAT THE CITY COULDN&apos;T
HAVE DONE ON ITS OWN.
&gt;&gt; PORFIRY AND SO I THINK
SENDING WRITTEN COMMUNICATION
IS EFFECTIVE.
I THINK DISCUSSING IT ON
OCTOBER 3RD OR SIX OR WHATEVER
THAT DATE IS IS APPROPRIATE AND
I THINK MAKING SURE THAT CITY
ADMINISTRATOR HONI IS ALSO
APPRIZED IN DETAIL IS
APPROPRIATE AS WELL.
&gt;&gt; SO ALL THREE SUGGESTIONS.
&gt;&gt; YES.
AND SO WE HAVE A CHAIR AND VICE
HERE.
&gt;&gt; WE DON&apos;T HAVE A WRITING
PERSON WHO WE HAD I&apos;M JUST YOU
KNOW, I WANT YOU TO TELL ME TO
WRITE SOMETHING.
&gt;&gt; I JUST WRITE IT OK?
SO SO ARE OUR OUTGOING CHAIR IS
GOING TO VOLUNTEER I MEAN I
THINK YOU COMMUNICATE IN
WRITING AND THEN IT BECOMES A
PART OF THE RECORD.
YOU KNOW WHAT YOU SAY TO
SOMEBODY THAT YOU KNOW BUT
YOU&apos;VE WRITTEN COMMUNICATION IS
PART OF THE RECORD.
WE GO ON RECORD EARLY ON IN THE
PROCESS THAT THIS STINKS OR
WHATEVER YOU I THINK YOU PUT IT
QUITE LIKE THAT.
&gt;&gt; HOW ABOUT I WRITE YOU I&apos;VE
NO PROBLEM WITH THAT DONE.
OH QUESTION.
&gt;&gt; IS IT TOO EARLY ON TO GET A
NEW CONSULTANT?
THAT&apos;S A FASCINATING QUESTION.
I MEAN COULD YOU SAY LOUDER FOR
THE PEOPLE IN THE BACK?
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
IS IT TOO EARLY ON TO GET NEW
CONSULTANTS?
&gt;&gt; I DON&apos;T KNOW THE ANSWER TO
THAT QUESTION BUT I THINK IT&apos;S
AN EXCELLENT QUESTION TO ASK.
I DON&apos;T KNOW WHAT THE TERMS
ARE.
&gt;&gt; I DON&apos;T KNOW HOW TO BE AND
DISPERSE FOLLOW UP WITH THAT
BECAUSE I&apos;M NEW SO I&apos;M NOT SURE
I WASN&apos;T HERE WHEN THE PROCESS
STARTED AS FAR AS TO GET TO
WHERE YOU ARE NOW.
BUT IT SEEMS LIKE IF THAT IS
SOMETHING THAT CAN BE ON THE
TABLE THAT THE COMMISSIONER IS
THAT PEOPLE ARE ON THIS
COMMISSION AND WILL BE INVOLVED
IN THE PROCESS OF CHOOSING THE
CONSULTANT PEOPLE SO THAT YOU
HAVE A BETTER GAUGE OF THE
PEOPLE THAT YOU&apos;RE DEALING WITH
IF THAT&apos;S A POSSIBILITY BECAUSE
REMEMBER RAMLI THANK YOU A LOT
OF GOOD GOOD POINTS BEING
RAISED HERE TONIGHT.
UNFORTUNATELY SOME OF THE
CRITICISMS OF THIS PROCESS ARE
CRITICISMS WE&apos;VE HEARD BEFORE
WHERE ON THE ONSET OF ANYTHING
JUST COMMISSION IS SUPPOSED TO
BE PART OF THE PROCESS AND THEN
WE GET MIDWAY POINT.
WE REALIZE THERE&apos;S NOT BEEN A
WHOLE LOT OF ENGAGEMENT AND
COMMUNICATION WITH THIS WITH
THIS BODY.
WE&apos;VE SEEN IT FROM A VERY FROM
THE VERY BEGINNING THE POLICE
CHIEF THE LAST POLICE CHIEF
HIRING AND IT&apos;S CONTINUED FOR
YEARS I THINK IT WOULD BE
PROBABLY TOO LATE TO TO START
THE PROCESS OR GET A DIFFERENT
CONSULTANCY.
CONTRACTS WERE SIGNED AND IT&apos;S
GOING TO BE HARD TO GET OUT
OF THAT.
YOU MAY HAVE TO START OVER AND
THEN THE BAD WILL COME WITH
DELAYED ACTION AND IT HAS TO
COME FROM COUNCIL APPROVAL.
THERE&apos;S A LOT OF CHANGES GOING
ON NOT JUST WITH THIS
COMMISSION BUT COUNCIL ITSELF
AND IT&apos;S GOING TO BE A WHILE
BEFORE THERE IS THERE&apos;S THE
KIND OF GENERAL MOMENTUM ON
THIS ISSUE WITH THAT.
BUT I THINK THERE IS UNANIMITY
EVERYONE&apos;S UNANIMOUS ON WHAT
THEY WANT TO SEE IN THE END.
BUT IT&apos;S THIS THIS REPORT ON
THIS CONSULTANT AND THE LACK
OF DEPTH THAT BEING EXPLORED IS
CONCERNING.
BUT UNFORTUNATELY IT&apos;S NOT THE
FIRST TIME I THINK THERE HAS
BEEN A TENDENCY TO KIND OF PUT
DISTANCE BETWEEN THESE KIND
OF ACTIVITY
IS IN THE CITY
ADMINISTRATOR.
IT KIND OF I DON&apos;T KNOW,
WALKING AWAY OR STEPPING ASIDE
FROM DIRECT INVOLVEMENT WHICH
LEADS THIS ALIENATION THAT
WE&apos;RE SEEING UM, I THINK THIS
BODY SHOULD SPEAK WITH
RESOLUTIONS.
I THINK IT&apos;S MORE EFFECTIVE
WHEN YOU SPEAK WITH RESOLUTIONS
THE COMMISSIONER HAS POINTED
OUT IN WRITING IT&apos;S IMPORTANT.
I THINK THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR
IS THE ONE WHO IS IN CHARGE
OF THIS AND CITY COUNCIL IS IN
CHARGE OF THE CITY
ADMINISTRATOR.
HOWEVER IT WANTS TO SPEAK TO
THIS ISSUE.
I THINK IT&apos;S IMPORTANT TO DO SO
IN WRITING AND RESOLUTION.
SO HAS EFFECTIVENESS OTHERWISE
I THINK IT&apos;S EASY JUST TO POINT
FINGERS AND FOR PEOPLE TO THINK
SOMETHING&apos;S ACTUALLY GOING TO
BE DONE DIFFERENTLY.
SO I&apos;M JUST EXPRESSING
DISAPPOINTMENT BUT THERE IS A
LOT OF ELECTED OFFICIALS WHO
DON&apos;T SCRUTINIZE THE SPENDING
THAT I HEAR BEING DISCUSSED
HERE LIKE WHAT YOU SHOULD GET
FOR THIS KIND OF MONEY.
UM, QUITE FRANKLY I DON&apos;T THINK
IT&apos;S A BIG CONCERN FOR MANY WHO
ARE MAKING THESE DECISIONS
CURRENTLY.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
I WAS JUST THINKING MAYBE I
SHOULD MAKE IT SUPER CLEAR WHY
THIS SURVEY MATTERS, WHY THIS
WORK MATTERS, WHY YOU NEED MORE
THAN A SURVEY, WHY YOU NEED
BECAUSE WHAT WHAT CAN
POTENTIALLY HAPPEN IS YOU GET
INFORMATION FROM AN ONLINE
SURVEY THAT INCLUDES THE VIEWS
OF PEOPLE WHO ARE NOT SO LIKELY
TO USE THE SERVICE AND WE NEVER
FIND OUT THE NEEDS OF PEOPLE
WHO ARE ACTUALLY MOST LIKELY TO
USE IT AND SO YOU END UP WITH
SOME MANDATE TO DEVELOP A
SERVICE THAT IN THE END IS NOT
GOING TO SERVE PEOPLE VERY WELL
AND THAT IS HUGELY PROBLEMATIC.
THAT IS HUGELY PROBLEMATIC.
SO I HAVE A QUESTION I SUPPOSE
FROM COUNCILMAN RAMLAH.
&gt;&gt; WE ARE YOU ARE YOU ARE YOU
SUGGESTING THAT WHATEVER WE
SEND IN WRITING SHOULD BE IN
THE FORM OF A RESOLUTION FROM
THE COMMISSION IN ORDER TO HAVE
ANY DESIRED EFFECT?
&gt;&gt; WELL, I THINK IT IS MORE
EFFECTIVE IF IT IS IN A
RESOLUTION THAT&apos;S JUST BEEN MY
EXPERIENCE AS YOU SAID, IT&apos;S
DOCUMENTED IT&apos;S RECORDED IT&apos;S
EXPRESSED WITH THE BODY&apos;S
WISHES AND I THINK IT&apos;S MORE
POWERFUL.
YOU KNOW, I DON&apos;T THINK
ANYTHING SHOULD BE DONE THROUGH
RESOLUTIONS.
BUT IF YOU FEEL THAT THIS IS
REACHES THAT LEVEL THEN PLEASE,
PLEASE DO SO YOU KNOW, I THINK
THERE ARE SOME THINGS THAT CAN
BE COMMUNICATED WITHOUT
RESOLUTIONS THAT HAVE
EFFECTIVENESS BUT THE GRAVITY
AND THE CONSEQUENCES OF THIS
PROGRAM, THE MONEY THAT&apos;S BEING
SPENT AND THE TRAJECTORY THAT
IS OVERWHELMING WITH A FLAWED
PROCESS IS JUST GOING TO DOOM
THE ENTIRE PROGRAM.
&gt;&gt; I THINK OUR COMMUNITIES
ACROSS SOUTHEAST MICHIGAN WHO
ARE WAITING TO SEE WHAT ANN
ARBOR DOES, WE&apos;RE WAITING TO
SEE HOW THIS PROGRAM WORKS,
WHETHER SUCCESSFUL OR NOT AND I
THINK IT&apos;S INCUMBENT ON US TO
DESIGN THE BEST PROGRAM WE CAN
AND NOT TO MAKE THE SAME
MISTAKE THAT WE HAVE MADE IN
THE PAST IN TERMS OF DESIGNING
PROGRAMS WITHOUT THE PEOPLE IN
THEM.
WE DO NOT NEED TO DESIGN
PROGRAMS FOR PEOPLE WE NEED TO
DESIGN THIS PROGRAM IN
PARTICULAR WITH PEOPLE AND THAT
IS A DISTINCT DIFFERENCE.
&gt;&gt; YOU KNOW WHAT&apos;S INTERESTING
?
WE JUST CAME OUT SO IT JUST
CAME BACK FROM THE NATIONAL
CONFERENCE AND ONE OF THE
THINGS THAT WAS AND I WISH I
HAD BROUGHT IT BUT I DIDN&apos;T BUT
IT WAS USED IN SOUTH AFRICA.
IT WAS IT GOES SOMETHING LIKE
ANYTHING YOU DO FOR ME WITHOUT
ME IS WORTHLESS.
&gt;&gt; YEAH.
SO YOU YOU KNOW, YOU HAVE TO
INCLUDE THE PEOPLE THAT ARE
GOING TO BE AFFECTED.
SO I THINK WOULD YOU ENTERTAIN
A MOTION?
I WOULD ENTERTAIN A MOTION SO I
MOVE THAT THE COMMISSION
DESIGNATE COMMISSIONER JACKSON
TO TO PREPARE ALONG WITH MYSELF
A RESOLUTION TO COUNCIL
EXPRESSING NUMBER ONE FOR OUR
BELIEF IN THE IMPORT OF WHAT&apos;S
GOING ON AND OUR CONCERNS ABOUT
WHAT IS GOING ON.
&gt;&gt; AND I WOULD THINK THAT IF WE
CAN I THINK IT SHOULD AND SINCE
THIS IS AN ONGOING PROCESS, IT
SHOULDN&apos;T WAIT TILL THE NEXT
MEETING.
SO PERHAPS WE CAN GET IT OUT TO
THE COMMISSIONERS BY EMAIL.
CERTAINLY I THINK COMMISSIONER
JACKSON AND I CAN WORK IN THE
NEXT FEW DAYS AND IF IT&apos;S
APPROVED THEN WE CAN GO AHEAD
AND FORWARD IT.
&gt;&gt; SO THAT&apos;S MY SECOND ANY
OTHER DISCUSSION JUST MAKE SURE
THAT IF WE ARE GOING TO MAKE A
RESOLUTION ABOUT THIS, IT
DOESN&apos;T MEAN THAT THIS ISN&apos;T
BINDING AND WE DON&apos;T HAVE TO
HAVE A AN EMERGENCY MEETING
OF THE COMMISSION TO APPROVE
BECAUSE WE ALREADY HAD THE
RESOLUTION AND WHAT WE ARE
DOING IS ARE WAITING FOR THE
DRAFT THAT IS COMING FROM BOTH
THE THE OUTGOING CHAIR AND THE
INCOMING VICE CHAIR AND IF THAT
ADDRESSES THE CONCERNS OF THE
COMMISSION ALREADY WE HAVE A
RESOLUTION AND THAT CAN BE
PASSED TO WHETHER THE
ADMINISTRATOR OR TO THE CITY
COUNCIL.
&gt;&gt; SO THE RESOLUTION SO YOUR
MOTION MIGHT BE AMENDED TO SAY
THAT KRECH WE ARE NOW VOTING TO
SEND A RESOLUTION TO COUNCIL
REGARDING THIS ISSUE AS LONG AS
THE DRAFT THAT IS CIRCULATED TO
THE COMMISSIONERS RECEIVES ITS
EDITS FROM THE COMMISSION AND
IS APPROVED BY THE COMMISSION
THEN RIGHT NOW WE ARE VOTING TO
SEND THAT CORRECT.
WE ARE APPROVING THAT WE SAID
THAT RESOLUTION.
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
AS YOU MOVED YOU SECONDED
FRANCIS SECONDED ANY OTHER
DISCUSSION.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU TO HIS
PARLIAMENTARY SPEAKING AND I
DON&apos;T PROCLAIM TO BE AN EXPERT
ON ROBERT&apos;S RULES IS THAT QUITE
FRANKLY WE HAVE, YOU KNOW, A
MEETING ON OCTOBER 3RD.
THERE COULD BE IN A DIFFERENT
MAYBE IT&apos;S NOT A RESOLUTION
THAT YOU NEED TO PASS BECAUSE
OF THE CONDITIONS THAT YOU
DISCUSS IN THE TIME FRAME.
BUT A COMMUNICATION TO COUNCIL
THAT CAN BE INCLUDED IN OUR
INJURED A LETTER WHICH IS THE
COMMUNICATION GOES TO MAKE ITS
EDITORIAL AGENDA RATHER THAN A
FORMAL RESOLUTION.
AGAIN, I&apos;M NOT SURE WHAT&apos;S
PROCEDURALLY ACCEPTABLE BUT I
WOULD FEEL THAT I WOULD HAVE TO
LOOK AT THE RESOLUTION VERBATIM
FOR IT TO BE BINDING TO TO THE
LEVEL OF BUT EVEN WE SEE ON
COUNCIL AT LEAST AND YOU KNOW,
I JUST THINK EITHER BUT YOU
MIGHT WANT TO CHECK WITH
CHRISTOPHER FOR US HERE.
YOU KNOW WHAT&apos;S GOING ON IN THE
CITY ATTORNEY&apos;S OFFICE TO SEE
IF IT&apos;S WHAT BUT WHAT&apos;S
ACCEPTABLE PERHAPS YOU A SIMPLE
COMMUNIQU I GET TO THE AGENDA.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
I THINK WE ACTUALLY CAN VOTE
NOW THAT A RESOLUTION DRAFTED
IN THE FUTURE SHOULD IT BE
CIRCULATED AMONG AND MEET THE
APPROVAL OF THE COMMISSION BE
APPROVED TO BE SENT
COMMISSIONER THEIN, IT&apos;S
NOTHING ABOUT US WITHOUT US.
IT&apos;S FOR US.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU FOR THE
SO WE CAN DO
TWO THINGS WE CAN DO THREE
THINGS WE CAN CREATE A DRAFT
RESOLUTION AND CIRCULATE THAT
PENDING APPROVAL OF THIS BODY
WE CAN ALSO CONSTRUCT IN THE
INTERIM A COMMUNICATION TO
COUNCIL THAT WE CAN CIRCULATE
TO THIS BODY FOR ANYONE&apos;S
EDITS, APPROVAL&apos;S ADDITIONS
THAT CAN BE SENT SUCH THAT IT
CAN BE ATTACHED TO THE AGENDA
FOR THEIR MEETING AT THAT
OCTOBER 3RD MEETING.
WE CAN ADDRESS THIS IN THE
INTRODUCTION TO COUNCIL AND
THIS TIME WE&apos;RE GOING TO DO
THAT TOGETHER.
SO I&apos;M GOING TO HAND OFF TO THE
NEW CHAIR WHO WILL THEN TAKE IT
AWAY AND SO WE CAN DO THAT IN
THREE WAYS.
YOUR DIRECTOR?
&gt;&gt; YES, SIR.
I LOVE THE IDEA OF DOING THE
LETTER AND THE PERSONAL
APPEARANCE ON THE THIRD.
IT&apos;S BEING THE CHOICES THAT WE
SHOULD MAKE AND HOLD THE FORMAL
RESOLUTION TO A LATER DATE IF
WE DEEM THAT THAT&apos;S NECESSARY
AT ONE TIME SO WE COULD COME
BACK WITH A DRAFT READY FOR
THIS AT OUR OCTOBER EXACTLY
MEETING.
BUT IN THE INTERIM DO A
COMMUNICATION WHICH WOULD BE
SHARED AMONG THE ENTIRE
COMMISSION ANYWAY FOR INPUT.
CORRECT.
DO WE HAVE TO HAVE A RESOLUTION
FOR THE COMMUNICATION OR NOT?
IF NOT WE CAN APPOINT
THE
OUTGOING CHAIR AND VICE CHAIR A
NEW VICE HERE TO DRAFT THIS
COMMUNICATION AND SEND IT TO
THE COUNCIL TO BE INCLUDED IN
THE AGENDA FOR OCTOBER .
I THINK WE DO WE HAVE DONE
COMMUNICATIONS TO THEM BEFORE
IN WRITING.
THEY HAVE BEEN ATTACHED TO
THEIR COUNCIL MEETING PACKET SO
I DO NOT BELIEVE WE HAVE TO
HAVE A FORMAL RESOLUTION TO DO
SO.
&gt;&gt; SO WHAT WE ARE AGREEING TO
DO NOW IF I&apos;M NOT MISTAKEN IS
WE ARE GOING TO DRAFT A
COMMUNICATION THAT WE WILL
CIRCULATE AMONG EVERYONE VERY
SOON IN THE NEXT COUPLE OF DAYS
FOR YOU ALL&apos;S INPUT THAT WE
WILL GET THAT TO COUNCIL SO IT
CAN BE INCLUDED IN OUR PACKET.
IT WILL BE ADDRESSED AT THE
COUNCIL MEETING AND ON AT THE
BEGINNING OF OCTOBER AS WELL.
WE CAN THEN BRING A DRAFT
RESOLUTION HERE AND CONSIDER
THAT AT THE END OF OCTOBER IF
THAT IS STILL NECESSARY IN
WHICH CASE MAYBE WE WILL HAVE
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION SUCH
THAT IT WILL NEED TO BE AMENDED
EVEN BY THEN.
DOES THAT WORK FOR EVERYONE?
COMMISSIONER?
IT WORKS FINE.
IT I DON&apos;T KNOW IF I SHOULD
PROCEDURAL WITHDRAW MY MOTION.
YOU COULD AND THEN I AND THEN
THERE STILL SHOULD BE SOME KIND
OF AUTHORIZATION FOR APPROVAL
OF THE LETTER TO GO TO COUNCIL
FROM THE COMMISSION.
WHEN DOES WHEN IS THAT IF THE
MEETING IS ON THE 3RD IS IT
THREE OR SIX IT&apos;S THE THIRD SO
SO WHEN DO WHEN DOES ONE THING
HAVE TO BE IN IN ORDER TO GET
ON THE AGENDA.
DOES ANYONE KNOW THAT FRIDAY
THE FRIDAY BEFORE THE MEETING
SO THIS FRIDAY WE CAN YES.
&gt;&gt; YES WE CAN WE CAN DO THIS
TOMORROW.
OK SO SO SO EVERYONE LOOK OUT
FOR AN EMAIL TOMORROW BECAUSE
WE&apos;LL SEND YOU A DRAFT OF THE
COMMUNIQU AND THEN YOU CAN
EDIT, ADD, SUBTRACT AND SEND IT
BACK BY THURSDAY.
RIGHT PLEASE AND THANK YOU.
SO I&apos;M GOING TO WITHDRAW MY
MOTION IF THAT&apos;S ALL RIGHT WITH
THOSE WHO SECONDED THAT.
&gt;&gt; THAT MAKES SENSE.
I BELIEVE WE ARE ALL SQUARED
WITH ROBERT AND THE RULES BUT
DO WE STILL NEED AN
AUTHORIZATION TO SEND THE
COMMUNIQU FROM THE COMMITTEE?
WELL I WANT VERY GOOD THANK YOU
.
ANY OTHER CONVERSATION ABOUT
THIS ON OUR RESPONSE SURVEY
PROCESS I HAVE A QUESTION I&apos;M
SORRY I&apos;M SORRY I HAD TERM
RUNWAY I BECAUSE THIS IS WHAT I
THINK IS KIND IT&apos;S A I THINK IF
IF THE COMMUNICATION IN THE
PRESENTATION THE THIRD FALL ON
DEAF EARS AND NOT MUCH IS DONE
AND IS TO THIS LEVEL OF CONCERN
ABOUT THE DIRECTION IS THAT
COUNCIL MEMBERS OF THIS
COMMITTEE CAN INTRODUCE IN THE
NOVEMBER MEETING A RESOLUTION
THAT THIS COMMISSION HOPES TO
DRAFT AND WE CAN ADD A
RESOLUTION ON THE COUNCIL
AGENDA DIRECT THE CITY
ADMINISTRATOR TO DO OR TAKE AN
ALTERNATIVE COURSE OF ACTION.
SO TO BECAUSE TIME IS OF THE
ESSENCE AND I WE JUST PREPARE
TO HAVE THAT READY TO GO FOR
THE NOVEMBER FIRST MEETING IN
NOVEMBER SO THEN COUNCIL CAN
VOTE ON THAT IF THERE NEEDS TO
BE A CHANGE IN THE COURSE
OF THE PROCESS SO WE CAN DO
THAT BY OUR OCTOBER MEETING
WHICH IS AT THE END OF THE
MONTH WHICH SHOULD PREP FOR A
MEETING OF COUNCIL AND THE
BEGINNING OF NOVEMBER
.
ALL RIGHT.
SO COMMUNICATIONS ARE NEXT BUT
I THOUGHT IT MIGHT BE HELPFUL
IF COMMISSIONERS HOWARD OR
HARRISON WANTED TO TALK AT ALL
ABOUT OUR NACOLE CONFERENCE.
&gt;&gt; I DO TAKE IT AWAY.
&gt;&gt; I THANK YOU.
YEAH.
YOU KNOW, AND I JUST GOT BACK
IN TOWN YESTERDAY NORMALLY IF I
GO TO A CONFERENCE I LIKE TO
HAVE SOMETHING IN WRITING TO
REPORT BACK BECAUSE YOU SEND
THIS THEY&apos;RE NOT JUST FOR US
BUT TO TO SHARE WHAT WE WHAT WE
LEARNED AND IT WAS A VERY GOOD
CONFERENCE.
I LEARNED A LOT BUT I WANT TO I
WOULD LIKE THIS COMMISSION TO
THINK ABOUT SOMETHING THAT&apos;S
BEEN BOTHERING ME.
YOU KNOW, I ASKED CHIEF COX
DURING ONE OF OUR MEETINGS
WHETHER THERE WERE ANY MEMBERS
OF THESE TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS LIKE THE PROUD
BOYS AND THE THREE PERCENTERS
AND THOSE PEOPLE WHOSE LEADERS
ARE NOW BEING PROSECUTED FOR
THEIR ACTIONS AGAINST THE
GOVERNMENT IF WE HAD ANY
OF THOSE INDIVIDUALS AND IF
THERE&apos;S ANY WAY TO TELL IF WE
HAD THOSE INDIVIDUALS IN OUR
POLICE DEPARTMENT AND I WAS I
WAS TOLD THAT THERE WERE NONE
AND I ACCEPT THAT.
HOWEVER, I THINK THAT YOU KNOW
AND I TALKED TO PEOPLE AT THE
CONFERENCE AND THERE WAS A
SESSION ON DEALING WITH WHITE
SUPREMACY, WHITE SUPREMACY I
THINK IT WAS CALLED WHITE
SUPREMACY SOMETHING LIKE THAT.
&gt;&gt; BUT ROOTING OUT WHITE
SUPREMACY IN YOUR LAW
ENFORCEMENT ORGANIZATION.
&gt;&gt; THERE YOU GO.
AND EXTREMISM AND LAW
ENFORCEMENT AND EXTREMISM.
&gt;&gt; AND SO I TALKED TO ONE
OF THE ATTORNEYS THERE.
THE ISSUE IS, YOU KNOW, THESE
THESE GROUPS COMMUNICATE
THROUGH ONLINE CHATS AND POSTS
AND THIS KIND OF THING AND IF
IT COMES TO LIGHT THAT A MEMBER
OF THE ORGANIZATION IS INVOLVED
IN THESE ORGANIZATIONS, THEN
WHAT DO WE DO?
HOW CAN WE DEAL WITH THAT AND
STILL PROTECT THEIR FIRST
AMENDMENT RIGHTS?
AND I THINK THAT POLICY CAN BE
DRAFTED.
WE HAVE TO LOOK AT REALLY WHAT
IS THEIR OATH?
WHAT DO THEY SAY THEY&apos;RE GOING
TO DO WHEN THEY ARE HIRED AS
OFFICERS FOR ANN ARBOR AND THIS
IS SOMETHING THIS KIND OF THING
IS GOING ON ACROSS THE COUNTRY
AND THAT&apos;S ONE THING WE LEARN
WHEN WE GO TO THESE NATIONAL
PRESS CONFERENCES THAT WHAT&apos;S
GOING ON ACROSS THE COUNTRY
THERE HAVE BEEN OFFICERS AND
OTHER DEPARTMENTS.
IT&apos;S BEEN FOUND OUT THAT
THEY&apos;RE THEY&apos;RE INVOLVED IN
THESE ONLINE CHATS AND VARIOUS
THINGS WITH THESE ORGANIZATIONS
AND SOME DEPARTMENTS HAVE TRIED
,YOU KNOW, TO DO THINGS ABOUT
IT.
BUT IT&apos;S A MATTER OF WHAT IS
THE POLICY BECAUSE IN ONE
INSTANCE YOU HAVE AN OFFICER
WAS FIRED AND HE SUED AND AND
ANTOINE WE HEARD OF A
DEPARTMENT WHERE THE OH, I
THINK IT WAS LIKE THE CHIEF OR
SOME HIGH OFFICE HAD A NAZI
FLAG, YOU KNOW, IN HIS OFFICE
POSTED IN HIS OFFICE AND WAS
FIRED AND HE HE SUED ON THE
BASIS OF HIS FIRST AMENDMENT
RIGHT, YOU KNOW, TO BE A NAZI
AGAIN.
SO THE ISSUE BOILS DOWN TO
WHETHER A POLICY CAN BE DRAFTED
WHICH SAYS BASICALLY IF YOU ARE
INVOLVED IN AND I HAVEN&apos;T
DRAFTED IT YET THAT&apos;S WHY I&apos;M
BUT BUT I&apos;M GOING TO WORK ON IT
IF ANYBODY WANTS TO WORK ON IT
WITH ME, I&apos;D BE HAPPY.
BUT THAT SAYS THAT CERTAIN
THINGS ARE DETRIMENTAL TO THE
DEPARTMENT AND SPELL OUT SOME
OF THOSE THINGS.
YOU CAN&apos;T BE TOO SPECIFIC BUT
YOU CAN&apos;T BE TOO GENERAL I I
REMEMBER BEING IN IN NICHOLS IT
WAS AN ONLINE SESSION AND ONE
OF THE SPEAKERS WAS FORMER
CHIEF ART ACEVEDO AND HE WAS IN
TEXAS AND THEN FLORIDA AND NOW
HE&apos;S RETIRED BUT HE SAID
SOMETHING THAT STUCK WITH ME.
HE SAID YOU CAN BE RACIST IN
THE UNITED STATES.
YOU KNOW YOU HAVE THE ABILITY
TO DO THAT BUT YOU CAN&apos;T BE A
COP IN MY DEPARTMENT AND YOU
KNOW THAT WAS THE BOTTOM LINE
BECAUSE YOU CAN&apos;T DO YOUR JOB
RIGHT IF YOU WERE A RACIST AND
SO I WOULD HOPE THAT WE CAN
FIGURE OUT HOW TO MAKE THAT
POLICY THAT THAT&apos;S THE I THINK
THAT&apos;S THAT&apos;S WHAT IT BOILS
DOWN TO.
&gt;&gt; WE WERE ALL IN THAT SESSION
AND WE ARE ALL DENHA IT WAS IT
WAS QUITE AN INFORMATIONAL
SESSION.
THERE WERE SO MANY I WAS TAKING
PICTURES AND TEXTING THE VICE
HERE WHO WASN&apos;T THERE.
I WAS LIKE CAN YOU BELIEVE THIS
BECAUSE THEY WERE SHOWING
LOCKERS AND LOTS OF EVIDENCE
OF FOLKS WHO WERE PARTICIPATING
IN MANY DIFFERENT KINDS
OF GROUPS.
IN FACT THERE&apos;S A THERE&apos;S A
LATINO WHITE SUPREMACIST GROUP
CALLED THE BANDIDOS WHO ARE IN
CALIFORNIA AND THEY WERE
SHOWING, YOU KNOW, SOME OF THE
THINGS THAT THEY HAD ON THEIR
LOCKERS.
AND WHAT IT BOILS DOWN TO IS
THE WAY THAT YOU CAN WORK WITH
THAT IS IF THERE IS A POLICY IN
THE DEPARTMENT AND SO THAT HAS
TO BE SOMETHING THAT&apos;S
IMPORTANT TO ANN ARBOR.
THAT HAS TO BE SOMETHING THAT
THE CITY SAYS THIS IS WHAT WE
WANT OF OUR POLICE DEPARTMENT
THAT WE DO NOT WANT PEOPLE WHO
BELONG TO THESE PARTICULAR
GROUPS BECAUSE THEIR BELIEFS
AND BEHAVIORS ARE AT ODDS WITH
WHAT WE CONSIDER TO BE CONDUCT
THAT IS APPROPRIATE FOR OUR
POLICE.
AND SO
WHEN THOSE POLICIES ARE
IN PLACE THEN THEY CAN BE
ENFORCED AND THEY DO HAVE TO BE
SPECIFIC ENOUGH AND YET BROAD
ENOUGH SO THAT THEY&apos;RE NOT
INFRINGING ON PEOPLE&apos;S FIRST
AMENDMENT RIGHTS TO EXPRESS
THEMSELVES.
BUT THERE HAVE BEEN SOME
DEPARTMENTS WHO HAVE HAD THOSE
SUCCESSFUL POLICIES WRITTEN AND
SO I THINK THAT&apos;S AN IMPORTANT
THING EVERY TIME WE GO TO THESE
CONFERENCES, ESPECIALLY WHEN WE
GO IN PERSON AND WE HAVEN&apos;T
BEEN ABLE TO GO TO PRISON FOR A
COUPLE OF YEARS, YOU COME BACK
WITH SO MUCH KNOWLEDGE AND
YOU&apos;RE HANGING OUT WITH 400
OTHER OVERSIGHT PEOPLE WHICH IS
QUITE A UNIQUE EXPERIENCE IN
ANN ARBOR BECAUSE IT&apos;S JUST US
AND AND YOU GO THERE AND THERE
ARE PEOPLE SO WHEN WE FIRST
WENT IN DETROIT WE MET PEOPLE
WHO WERE THERE BECAUSE FERGUSON
WAS JUST BEGINNING TO GET
OVERSIGHT BECAUSE MICHAEL BROWN
WAS KILLED.
WE MET PEOPLE FROM BALTIMORE
WHO WERE JUST GETTING UP AND
RUNNING AFTER FREDDIE GRAY WAS
KILLED.
&gt;&gt; AND SO WE WERE LIKE OH MY
GOSH, YOU KNOW, WE ARE PART
OF THIS THIS BIG GROUP
OF PEOPLE AND NOW WE SEE THOSE
AGENCIES UP AND RUNNING AND
CHICAGO HAS GONE THROUGH SO
MANY ITERATIONS OF A POLICE
OVERSIGHT OBVIOUSLY THEY ARE
STILL KILLING PEOPLE IN CHICAGO
AT ASTOUNDING RATES AND SO
THEY&apos;RE CONTINUING TO WORK ON
THE PROCESS AND HOW THEY CAN
GET BETTER.
BUT IN THE MEANTIME THEY HAVE
DEVELOPED AN EXTENSIVE TRAINING
PROGRAM FOR OVERSIGHT
PROFESSIONALS.
SOME OF THE TOOLS WOULD BE
APPLICABLE FOR US.
OTHERS MIGHT NOT BE SO MUCH BUT
THEY&apos;VE EXPRESSED A WILLINGNESS
FOR US TO GO TAKE A FIELD TRIP.
THEY WILL BE DOING SOME ONLINE
TRAININGS.
THEY ARE FUNDED.
THEY GET ONE PERCENT OF THE
POLICE BUDGET AND SO THEIR
FUNDING IS DICTATED BY HOW MUCH
THE POLICE GET AND THEIR POLICE
DEPARTMENT IS ABOUT 17 BILLION
DOLLARS I BELIEVE IS THE BUDGET
AND SO THEY HAVE A LARGE NUMBER
OF INVESTIGATORS AND THEY HAVE
TRAINED INTERVIEWERS AND THEY
HAVE PEOPLE DEDICATED TO DO
COMMUNICATIONS WITH COMMUNITY
GROUPS AND FAITH GROUPS AND
LEGISLATORS, ET CETERA.
AND SO THEY HAVE A HUGE
OPERATION THERE.
BUT SOME OF WHAT THEY DO IS
SOME OF WHAT WE COULD DO BETTER
AND AND SO EVERY TIME WE GO YOU
JUST COME BACK AND AND
CERTAINLY WE CAN ALL TALK WE
CAN YOU KNOW, WE SHOULD WRITE
UP SOME THINGS AND WE SHOULD
MAKE SURE THAT THIS INFORMATION
GETS SHARED BECAUSE IT IS AS
YOU SAY, WE&apos;RE NOT GOING SO WE
CAN GET BETTER.
WE&apos;RE GOING SO THIS COMMISSION
CAN GET BETTER AND SO IT&apos;S
CRITICAL THAT WE CONTINUE TO
PARTICIPATE IN THIS AND THAT
EVERYBODY GETS A CHANCE TO GO
WHETHER THAT&apos;S ONLINE OR IN
PERSON.
YOU DO LEARN SO MUCH AND YOU
LEARN THE SUBTLETIES OF HOW YOU
CAN WORK WITH ISSUES LIKE THAT
AND AND AND HOW TO DO OUTREACH
AND COMMUNITIES, FOR EXAMPLE.
SO SOME OF THE THINGS THAT I&apos;M
THINKING ABOUT WITH THIS SURVEY
ARE THINGS THAT I THINK
EVERYBODY SHOULD KNOW BUT
CLEARLY EVERYONE DOES NOT KNOW
THOSE THINGS.
AND SO COMMISSIONER HARRISON,
DID YOU WANT TO SAY ANYTHING
ABOUT THAT?
&gt;&gt; I MEAN I YOU KNOW, IT WAS MY
FIRST TIME OBVIOUSLY I&apos;M REALLY
HONESTLY STILL TRYING TO
PROCESS A LOT OF WHAT I
LEARNED.
IT WAS IT WAS PRETTY
OVERWHELMING, VERY EYE OPENING,
VERY EDUCATIONAL.
I&apos;M GLAD I HAD THE OPPORTUNITY
TO GO GIVEN THE CHANGES THAT
ARE COMING UP SOON.
SO YEAH, IT WAS I WAS JUST YOU
KNOW, LIKE YOU SAID, YOU WERE
THE FIRST ONE YOU WENT TO THAT
HIGH WAS I WAS BLOWN AWAY.
I WAS LIKE WOW.
FIRST OF ALL I&apos;M IN A ROOM WITH
ALL OF THESE FOLKS THAT CARE
ABOUT, YOU KNOW, SO DEEPLY
ABOUT WHAT I CARE ABOUT AND YOU
KNOW, FROM ACROSS THE COUNTRY
IN OTHER COUNTRIES.
&gt;&gt; YEAH, IT WAS WAS JUST I WAS
I WAS OVERWHELMED THERE ARE
PEOPLE FROM SOUTH AMERICA,
CENTRAL AMERICA, SIERRA LEONE,
ANOTHER PLACE FROM THE AFRICAN
CONTINENT.
THERE ARE PEOPLE FROM FROM
EASTERN EUROPE WHO ARE THERE&apos;S
A LARGE CONTINGENT I DON&apos;T
REMEMBER FROM WHERE THEY CAME
BUT YOU KNOW, I THINK SUGGESTS
EVERYBODY GOES TWICE THE FIRST
TIME YOU GO YOU FEEL LIKE
YOU&apos;RE DRINKING FROM A FIRE
HOSE.
YEAH, IT&apos;S JUST VERY
OVERWHELMING.
THERE&apos;S A LOT OF INFORMATION.
YOU&apos;RE IN DISBELIEF THE SECOND
TIME YOU GO YOU&apos;VE BEGUN TO
PRACTICE SOME OF THE THINGS AND
YOU REALIZE OH OK.
AND NOW YOU CAN TAKE IN THE
INFORMATION IN A COMPLETELY
DIFFERENT WAY BECAUSE YOU ARE
ARE HAVE BEEN ABLE TO PUT SOME
OF THOSE THINGS INTO PRACTICE.
AND SO ONE OF THE THINGS I SAID
WAS I WAS JUST KIND OF SHOWING
OFF TO EVERYONE.
I WAS LIKE LOOK, WE HAVE A
COMMISSIONER HERE BUT SHE GOT
ELECTED TO CITY COUNCIL SO NOW
WE&apos;RE GOING TO HAVE A CITY
COUNCIL PERSON WHO KNOWS ALL
THIS STUFF AND AND PEOPLE WERE
LIKE OH MY GOD, IF WE COULD GET
OUR CITY COUNCIL TO COME NOW I
WILL SAY THERE ARE PLENTY
OF LAW ENFORCEMENT PEOPLE AT
THIS CONFERENCE BECAUSE THERE
ARE PEOPLE IN LAW ENFORCEMENT
WHO ARE ALSO WORKING FOR THESE
THINGS.
WE MET CITY ATTORNEYS WHO ARE
WORKING ON THIS AND SO THEY
WERE THERE.
WE MET SOME LEGISLATORS, A US
HOUSE REPRESENTATIVE, SEVERAL
LOCAL STATE REPRESENTATIVES
WERE THERE.
WE MET PEOPLE WHO PAID THEIR
OWN WAY THERE BECAUSE THEIR
CHILDREN HAD BEEN KILLED BY
POLICE AND THEY WERE IN EVERY
SINGLE SESSION AND THEY WERE
ASKING BRILLIANT QUESTIONS ALL
THE TIME.
WE COMMUNITY ACTIVISTS WE MET
OTHER OVERSIGHT PROFESSIONALS
AND SO THE WIDE GROUP OF PEOPLE
THAT THAT COME AND PARTICIPATE
IN IS, YOU KNOW, VERY
EDUCATIONAL, YOU KNOW,
PRESENTATION BUT THEN THE BACK
AND FORTH OF IDEAS THAT HAPPENS
AND HOW COULD YOU DO THIS?
HOW COULD YOU DO THAT?
PEOPLE WERE VERY INTERESTED,
FOR EXAMPLE, IN THE FACT THAT
IN ANN ARBOR WE HAVE STARTED TO
LOOK AT THE POLICE UNION
CONTRACT AS A WAY TO THINK
ABOUT A WAY TO HAVE INFLUENCE
ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
WE WERE APPROACHED BY PEOPLE
FROM NEW YORK PEOPLE FROM
CALIFORNIA.
I MET A LABOR ATTORNEY, A CITY
ATTORNEY FROM CALIFORNIA WHO
WERE BOTH LIKE WE NEED TO DO A
PANEL.
&gt;&gt; WE NEED TO TALK ABOUT THAT.
&gt;&gt; AND SO EVEN THINGS THAT
WE&apos;RE DOING HERE ARE INNOVATIVE
AND CAN BE YOU KNOW, OTHER
PEOPLE CAN LEARN FROM EVEN
THOUGH WE LEARN SO MUCH FROM
EVERYONE ELSE WHEN WE GO.
BUT I THINK IT&apos;S JUST CRITICAL
TO PARTICIPATE IN THAT KIND
OF TRAINING IN PART BECAUSE
THIS IS VERY CHALLENGING WORK
TO DO IT YOU FEEL LIKE YOU&apos;RE
SWIMMING UPSTREAM ALL THE TIME.
SOMETIMES YOU&apos;RE LOOKING AT
BODY CAM FOOTAGE WE HAVE TALKED
ABOUT WHETHER THAT IS
DISTRESSING OR NOT IT IS TRUE
SOME OF US OTHERS OF US NOT SO
MUCH BUT IT IS DEFINITELY
CHALLENGING NONETHELESS.
IT&apos;S CERTAINLY JUST, YOU KNOW,
KIND OF TRYING TO MAKE SURE
THAT THE THINGS THAT WE KNOW
SHOULD GET DONE SHOULD GET
DONE.
FOR EXAMPLE, WE&apos;RE STILL
WORKING ON POLICE COMPLAINTS
WHERE WE EXPECTED TO BE SEEING
COMPLAINTS, NAMES AND THEY ARE
NOT PRESENT YET.
WE HAD INFORMATION ABOUT PRIOR
DISCIPLINE THAT IS NOW BEING
REDACTED FOR SOME REASON THAT
THAT SHOULD NOT BE.
AND SO WE HAVE TO KEEP FIGHTING
THESE SAME FIGHTS ALL OVER
AGAIN WHICH IS EXHAUSTING.
&gt;&gt; I THINK THAT AS OF TODAY WE
ARE SEEING THE NAMES OF THE
COMPLAINANTS THAT HALLELUJA
FIRM THAT DAY AND I BELIEVE
WE&apos;RE STILL WORKING ON GETTING
INTO THAT SWING OF NOT
REDACTING THE PAST BUT NOT
REINVENTING THE WHEEL AND WE
GOT TO KEEP GOING LAST YEAR
SPENT ONE YEAR WORKING OUT A
DETAILED PROCESS IN WRITING
ABOUT WHAT NEEDS TO BE INCLUDED
WITH EVERY SINGLE COMPLAINT IT
IS WORKED ON WITH THE CITY
ATTORNEY&apos;S OFFICE AND THE
POLICE CHIEFS AND DEPUTY CHIEFS
OF PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS.
AND SO YOU KNOW, THERE&apos;S BEEN A
LOT OF TURNOVER POLICE
OBVIOUSLY AND WE&apos;RE REALLY
HAPPY ABOUT SOME OF THE THINGS
THAT THEY HAVE COMING OUT.
BUT IT IS TOUGH WHEN YOU HAVE
TO START OVER EVERY TIME
THERE&apos;S THERE&apos;S THERE&apos;S
PERSONNEL CHANGES YOU HAVE TO
START OVER AGAIN.
&gt;&gt; AND SO THAT&apos;S CHALLENGING
AND THAT&apos;S PART OF WHAT MAKES
THIS EXHAUSTING.
YOU KNOW, AND AT FIRST WE SAID
WELL, WE&apos;RE NEW.
NO ONE&apos;S USED TO US BUT WE&apos;RE
NOT NEW ANYMORE.
AND SO, YOU KNOW, IT&apos;S A LITTLE
BIT MORE FRUSTRATING TO KIND
OF REINVENT THE WHEEL.
YOU EVERY SIX MONTHS.
THANK YOU AND THANKS FOR THAT
REPORT.
I&apos;M JUST WONDERING IF PERHAPS
THIS IS ALREADY WHETHER THERE
IS POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
WITHIN THE DEPARTMENT RIGHT NOW
THAT WOULD VIOLATE THEIR
WORKING CONTRACT WITH THE CITY
IF THEY ARE MEMBERS OF THESE
HATE GROUPS?
YOU KNOW, I THINK IT&apos;S
OBVIOUSLY BETTER FOR US TO HAVE
THESE IN PLACE SO WHEN THEY DO
ARISE YOU CAN ENFORCE THEM
OTHERWISE YOU GOT EMPLOYMENT
ISSUES EVEN THOUGH YOU&apos;RE ON
THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE MORAL
COMPASS, YOU END UP FIGHTING
WITH THESE UNIONS IN THE CBA
AND EVERY DAY AND YOU CAN&apos;T DO
WHAT YOU WANT TO DO AND BECAUSE
THESE THINGS AREN&apos;T IN PLACE TO
BEGIN WITH SO I THINK WORKING
ON MAKING SURE THEY&apos;RE IN PLACE
SO THAT WHEN YOU DO NEED TO ACT
IN A LEGAL POSITION TO DO SO.
YOU KNOW, I WHEN YOU MENTIONED
CONTRE I MENTIONED TO SOMEONE
IN THE DEPARTMENT ABOUT THE
CONTRACTS I KNOW THE CLIENT IS
IT COMING UP?
I DON&apos;T KNOW WHAT THE STATUS IS
.
&gt;&gt; THEY ARE ACTUALLY IN
NEGOTIATION NOW SO THAT I DON&apos;T
BELIEVE WE GET TO SEE IT.
&gt;&gt; YEAH, IT GETS DRAFTED THOUGH
.
WELL, YOU KNOW, I ALWAYS I
LEARNED THAT A CONTRACT IS AN
AGREEMENT BETWEEN TWO PARTIES
AND EVERYBODY GETS SOMETHING
OUT OF WHEN YOU LOOK AT MOST
MANY LABOR UNION CONTRACTS, THE
ONLY PARTY THAT GETS ANYTHING
OUT OF IT IS THE UNION.
&gt;&gt; HMM.
POLICE UNIONS, NOT TEACHERS
UNIONS.
NO, NO.
I&apos;M SAYING YEAH, THIS IS THE
UNION WHATEVER UNION I WOULD
LIKE TO SEE AT SOME POINT
SOMETHING IN THE CONTRACT THAT
SAYS CITIZENS BANABA GET HONEST
,COURTEOUS POLICING AND SPELL
IT OUT SO THAT IT&apos;S A VIOLATION
OF THE CONTRACT IF SOMEONE IS
NOT COURTEOUS I MEAN I THINK
YOU KNOW, WHEN WE LOOK AT THESE
COMPLAINTS OVER AND OVER AND
OVER AGAIN HE WAS THE WAY HE
SPOKE TO ME AND WHY CAN&apos;T WE
SAY WE WANT
A POLICE OFFICER TO
BE COURTEOUS AND PUT IT IN THE
CONTRACT SO ANYWAY, I KNOW IT&apos;S
NOT GOING TO BE IN THIS
CONTRACT BUT I THINK SOMETHING
THAT WE OUGHT TO LOOK AT WHEN
WE GET THAT IN THERE CAN I GET
THAT ON A SOLID STAFF ALSO
PLEASE BECAUSE OF OUR SONG SO
WE WE&apos;VE STRUGGLED WITH THESE
ISSUES INTERNALLY HERE AT THE
CITY.
I THINK WE&apos;RE ALL AWARE THAT
BACK IN JUNE OF TWENTY TWENTY
ONE I HAD ASKED OUR ATTORNEY
FOR SOME INSIGHT INTO OUR OWN
H.R. POLICIES WHEN IT COMES TO
STANDARDS OF CONDUCT AND ON
DISCRIMINATION AND SHE GAVE
EXAMPLES OF HOW THE CITY HAS
HANDLED EMPLOYEES WHO&apos;VE USED
RACIAL OR ANTI LGBTQ SLURS.
THESE ARE THE FOLLOWING
EXAMPLES WHEN EMPLOYEE USED AN
ANTI LGBTQ SLUR THEY MADE OR
THEY MADE INAPPROPRIATE
COMMENTS ABOUT SEXUAL
ORIENTATION, RACE AND
ETHNICITY.
THERE WAS A PROPOSED
TERMINATION THAT RESULTED IN A
SEPARATION AGREEMENT.
AN EMPLOYEE MADE AN
INAPPROPRIATE COMMENT ABOUT
ANOTHER EMPLOYEE&apos;S RELIGION.
THEY WERE SUSPENDED FOR A WEEK
EMPLOYEE USE THE N-WORD AND
ENGAGED IN OTHER UNRELATED
MISCONDUCT.
THEY WERE TERMINATED.
AN EMPLOYEE MADE DEROGATORY
COMMENTS ABOUT CERTAIN RACE AND
ETHNICITIES AND ENGAGED IN
OTHER UNRELATED MISCONDUCT TO
SUSPENSIONS AND MANDATORY
COUNSELING THROUGH THE EMPLOYEE
ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.
SO I THINK WE HAVE GOOD STAFF
AND HAVING MARGI RABABAH WHO
CAME FROM DC IN A MUCH LARGER
INSTITUTION I DON&apos;T HAVE A LOT
OF EXPERIENCE IN THIS AND
THAT&apos;S MAYBE SOMETHING THAT WE
CAN REFLECT ON AND REFER TO IF
WE START EXPLORING THIS WITH
OUR POLICE BECAUSE THAT&apos;S THOSE
ARE THE THAT&apos;S REFERENCES HRP
10.1 STANDARDS OF CONDUCT AND
HRP TO POINT TO
NONDISCRIMINATION.
SO WE&apos;VE GOT A ROAD MAP WE JUST
RIGHT.
SO THE DIFFERENCE IS WE HAVE TO
MAKE SURE THAT THAT IS YOU
KNOW, THAT THAT WORKS WITHIN
THE CBA AND SO WE HAVE
EMPLOYEES WHO HAVE BEEN
TERMINATED AND WHO HAVE BEEN
SUSPENDED BUT NOT WITHIN THE
POLICE FORCE.
AND SO AGAIN, I THINK YOU
DISCOURTESY IS THE NUMBER ONE
COMPLAINT ACROSS THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA.
DISCOURTESY IS NOT NOTHING
THOUGH DISCOURTESY CHANGES THE
CLIMATE BETWEEN POLICE AND
COMMUNITIES IN WHICH THEY WORK.
THAT&apos;S RIGHT.
DISCOURTESY CHANGES COOPERATION
THAT POLICE EXPECT AND SO IT IS
NOT NOTHING AND IT IS A
SIGNIFICANT PROBLEM AND SO IT
IS SOMETHING ON WHICH WE CAN
WORK.
&gt;&gt; THERE IS A POLICY ALREADY IN
PLACE ABOUT THAT.
&gt;&gt; WHAT WE&apos;RE TALKING ABOUT IS
ACCOUNTABILITY AND AND
ENFORCEMENT OF YEAH THAT&apos;S WHAT
WE&apos;RE TALKING ABOUT.
&gt;&gt; I THINK IT&apos;S IT&apos;S IMPORTANT
FOR US TO DISTINGUISH BETWEEN
THE SLURS AND JUST BEING VERY
DISRESPECTFUL AND I THINK THAT
THAT IS SOMETHING THAT IS A LOT
IN THE COMPLAINTS THAT WE SEE
AND IN OTHER PEOPLE&apos;S
EXPERIENCES THAT IT&apos;S NOT
NECESSARILY SLURS OR NAMES BUT
IT&apos;S JUST A TOTAL DISREGARD FOR
TREATING PEOPLE IN A PROPER
MANNER.
SO WE&apos;LL COME BACK TO THIS BODY
WITH SOME FORMAL COMMENTS ABOUT
THE AND SOME SUMMARIES OF THE
SESSIONS THAT WE ATTENDED THERE
ONLINE SESSIONS THAT ARE
ONGOING THROUGHOUT THE YEAR
THOUGH.
SO I ENCOURAGE EVERYBODY TO
TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THOSE FROM
NAKUL.
WE ALL DO HAVE AN OBLIGATION TO
CONTINUE OUR TRAINING
THROUGHOUT THE YEAR AND TO
ACCUMULATE HOURS THIS TIME WE
USED BARCODES TO INDICATE OUR
PRESENCE AND SO WE WERE ALL
RACKING UP CONTINUING EDUCATION
HOURS THAT CAN BE DONE ONLINE
AS WELL.
AND SO IT&apos;S VERY IMPORTANT TO
GET EDUCATED ABOUT HOW
OVERSIGHT WORKS, HOW YOUR LOCAL
POLICE DEPARTMENT WORKS AND SO
THAT&apos;S AN EXPECTATION THAT WE
ALL PARTICIPATE IN THAT.
ARE THERE ANY OTHER
COMMUNICATIONS MANAGER I WOULD
LIKE TO ACKNOWLEDGE
COMMISSIONER PIPKIN SORRY WITH
YOUR NAME AND COMMISSIONER
BILLUPS IS PRESENT NOW.
&gt;&gt; THANK
I WANTED TO
ACKNOWLEDGE THE PRESENCE
OF COMMISSIONER AGAIN.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;M SORRY I OVERLOOKED YOUR
NAME AND COMMISSIONER BILLUPS
IS IN OUR ROLL CALL IS OK.
THANK YOU.
ANY OTHER COMMUNICATIONS
COUNCIL MEMBER?
YEAH I DON&apos;T WANT TO TAKE TOO
MUCH TIME BUT I BE HERE FOR
LONG SO UM USE IT.
UM THE EXAMPLE SET FORTH BY MY
COLLEAGUE ABOUT THE H.R.
POLICIES IS TRUE.
THE FACT IS THAT THOSE PROTECT
EMPLOYEE FROM EMPLOYEE AND IN
THIS CASE WE DON&apos;T HAVE THAT
RELATIONSHIP UM THAT&apos;S BEEN
DESCRIBED AS THE LACK
OF COURTESY YOU HAVE CIVILIAN
HERE IS A PARAMILITARY FORCE UM
AND THAT&apos;S A DIFFERENT UH THAT
NEEDS TO BE UNDERSTOOD IF FOLKS
DON&apos;T HAVE THE PROTECTIONS THAT
CITY EMPLOYEES DO.
UM GIVE IT TO THEM.
SO UM IT&apos;S GREAT THAT THOSE
EXIST BUT UNFORTUNATELY THEY
DON&apos;T EXPAND INTO THE CIVILIAN
POPULATION SO UM SO I THINK
IT&apos;S A BIG DISTINCTION.
&gt;&gt; YOU KNOW WHAT I THINK IT
MIGHT BE INTERESTING TO US TO
PONDER THIS AS A BODY AND FOR
COUNCIL TO THINK ABOUT THIS TO
ONE OF THE FASCINATING THINGS
IS WHEN WE START TO LOOK AT
COMPLAINTS THAT POLICE MAKE
ABOUT EACH OTHER, UM, THOSE
COMPLAINTS ARE SUSTAINED AT A
DIFFERENT RATE THAN WHEN
CITIZENS MAKE COMPLAINTS ABOUT
POLICE.
AND SO THERE IS TO SOME DEGREE
A BASELINE LEVEL OF TRUST THAT
POLICE OFFICERS ARE GIVEN WHEN
THEY ACCUSE EACH OTHER
OF THINGS WHICH WE DON&apos;T
NECESSARILY SEE TRANSLATED WHEN
CITIZENS ACCUSE POLICE
SOMETIMES OF THOSE VERY SAME
THINGS.
SO I HAVE BEEN PRIVY TO
COMPLAINTS WHERE A CITIZEN SIT
A PERSON A PERSON IN ANN ARBOR
CITIES ARE NOT CITIZEN HAS MADE
A COMPLAINT ABOUT A POLICE
OFFICER THAT WAS NOT SUSTAINED
WHERE AN OFFICER HAS MADE THE
EXACT SAME COMPLAINT AGAINST
THAT SAME OFFICER AND THAT WAS
UPHELD THEIR COMPLAINT WAS
AGREED WITH AND THAT IS VERY
TROUBLING FOR ME AND I THINK
THAT&apos;S SOMETHING THAT WE HAVE
TO THINK ABOUT AND SO WE DO
WORRY ABOUT EMPLOYEES HAVING
INTERACTIONS WITH EACH OTHER,
WHETHER THEY ARE CITY STAFF OR
WHETHER THEY ARE POLICE STAFF
EMPLOYEES OF THE CITY AS WELL.
AND THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THAT
AND CIVILIANS AND SO PEOPLE WHO
LIVE, WORK AND AND VISIT ANN
ARBOR AND I THINK THAT&apos;S
SOMETHING THAT WE HAVE TO DELVE
INTO A LITTLE BIT MORE DEEPLY
BECAUSE THAT IS INDICATIVE OF A
PATTERN OF THE WAY IN WHICH
PEOPLE ARE BELIEVED.
&gt;&gt; AND SO THAT&apos;S NOT SOMETHING
THAT WE NEED TO PASSIVELY SORT
OF LOOK AT.
THAT&apos;S SOMETHING THAT WE NEED
TO REALLY FIGURE OUT HOW TO
COMBAT BECAUSE WE SEE THAT
ALREADY.
&gt;&gt; I I AGREE WHOLEHEARTEDLY.
I JUST WANTED TO ADD ONE OTHER
THING.
SOMEONE THAT I SPOKE WITH AT
ONE OF THE PRESENTERS AT NACOLE
JUST FOR US TO THINK ABOUT
SOMETHING THAT THEY HAD
INITIATED WAS SOLICE THING NOT
JUST COMPLAINTS FROM CITIZENS
BUT ALSO IF THERE WERE GOOD
INTERACTIONS WITH THE POLICE
THEY ENCOURAGED THE CITIZENS TO
ALSO REPORT THOSE AND
PERIODICALLY THEY WOULD GIVE
SOME KIND OF AWARD PUBLICLY TO
OFFICERS WHO HAD A NUMBER
OF GOOD REPORTS AND OF GOOD
INTERACTIONS WITH CITIZENS.
AND I THINK MAYBE IF WE JUST
SORT OF PONDER THAT IF THAT&apos;S
SOMETHING THAT WE EVEN WANT TO
CONSIDER WHAT IT SOUNDED LIKE A
REAL GOOD IDEA TO ME
.
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
IF THERE ARE NO FURTHER
COMMUNICATIONS, IS THERE A
MOTION TO ADJOURN JUST THE
PRIOR TO THE ADJOURNMENT?
I WOULD LIKE TO SEE THE WORDS.
ONE IS I WOULD LIKE TO THANK
TWO PEOPLE OVER HERE ON THIS
COMMISSION FOR THIS LONG
SERVICE.
THE COUNCIL MEMBER MR. ALLAWI
FOR HAS REALLY SERVING ON THIS
COMMITTEE SINCE THE INCEPTION
SINCE THE BEGINNING FOR HIS
GENUINE AND HONEST DISCUSSIONS
IDEAS EVEN AT TIMES WHEN THEY
WERE LOOKED AT A LITTLE BIT
DIFFERENT.
BUT YOU KNOW, WE BUILD
CONSENSUS BASED ON DIFFERENT
INTERPRETATIONS OF IDEAS AND I
WISH HIM THE BEST IN HIS LIFE
AND WHAT HE IS DOING.
IT WAS A PLEASURE SERVING WITH
YOU AND THE OTHER PERSON IS THE
OUTGOING CHAIR.
MR. JACKSON FOR HER SHE BROUGHT
AN ENERGY AND PASSION TO
LEADING THIS COMMISSION FOR THE
PAST THREE YEARS OR SO.
UH, WISH HER THE BEST AND ALSO
WOULD LIKE HER TO CONTINUE WITH
THIS PASSION AND SUPPORT AND
ENERGY TO PROCEED AND TO MAKE
PROGRESS WITH THIS COMMISSION
SERVING THE COMMUNITY AND THE
CITIZENS OF ANN ARBOR.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU BOTH FOR YOUR
SERVICE HERE.
HERE
.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
IT HAS BEEN AN HONOR.
ABSOLUTELY.
AND AND A PLEASURE AND A
PRIVILEGE TO WORK WITH ALL
OF YOU AND YOU&apos;RE STILL ON THE
COMMISSION WHERE IT IS.
&gt;&gt; YES.
I&apos;LL JUST BE SLIDING OVER A
CHAIR OR SO, BUT THANK YOU VERY
MUCH.
IT HAS BEEN I HAVE LEARNED A
LOT I&apos;M STILL LEARNING AND AND
I APPRECIATE THE OPPORTUNITY TO
HAVE DONE ANYTHING AT ALL.
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
SO NOW IS THERE A MOTION TO
ADJOURN?
I MAKE A MOTION TO JOIN OVER
THERE.
I ANYTHING SECOND ALL IN FAVOR.
&gt;&gt; HI.
&gt;&gt; WE ARE ADJOURNED